Transformer
Engineering

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

POWER ENGINEERING
1. Power Distribution Planning Reference Book, H.Lee Willis
2. Transmission Network Protection: Theory and Practice, Y.G.Paithankar
3. Electrical Insulation in Power Systems, N.H.Malik, A.A.Al-Arainy, and
M.I.Qureshi
4. Electrical Power Equipment Maintenance and Testing, Paul Gill
5. Protective Relaying: Principles and Applications, Second Edition, J.
Lewis Blackburn
6. Understanding Electric Utilities and De-Regulation, Lorrin Philipson and
H.Lee Willis
7. Electrical Power Cable Engineering, William A.Thue
8. Electric Systems, Dynamics, and Stability with Artificial Intelligence
Applications, James A.Momoh and Mohamed E.El-Hawary
9. Insulation Coordination for Power Systems, Andrew R.Hileman
10. Distributed Power Generation: Planning and Evaluation, H.Lee Willis and
Walter G.Scott
11. Electric Power System Applications of Optimization, James A.Momoh
12. Aging Power Delivery Infrastructures, H.Lee Willis, Gregory V.Welch,
and Randall R.Schrieber
13. Restructured Electrical Power Systems: Operation, Trading, and
Volatility, Mohammad Shahidehpour and Muwaffaq Alomoush
14. Electric Power Distribution Reliability, Richard E.Brown
15. Computer-Aided Power System Analysis, Ramasamy Natarajan
16. Power System Analysis: Short-Circuit Load Flow and Harmonics, J. C.Das
17. Power Transformers: Principles and Applications, John J.Winders, Jr.
18. Spatial Electric Load Forecasting: Second Edition, Revised and
Expanded, H.Lee Willis
19. Dielectrics in Electric Fields, Gorur G.Raju
20. Protection Devices and Systems for High-Voltage Applications,
Vladimir Gurevich
21. Electrical Power Cable Engineering: Second Edition, Revised and
Expanded, William A.Thue
22. Vehicular Electric Power Systems: Land, Sea, Air, and Space Vehicles,
Ali Emadi, Mehrdad Ehsani, and John M.Miller
23. Power Distribution Planning Reference Book: Second Edition, Revised
and Expanded, H.Lee Willis
24. Power System State Estimation: Theory and Implementation, Ali Abur
and Antonio Gómez Expósito
25. Transformer Engineering: Design and Practice, S.V.Kulkarni and
S.A.Khaparde
ADDITIONAL VOLUMES IN PREPARATION

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer
Engineering
Design and Practice
S.V.Kulkarni
S.A.Khaparde
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
Mumbai, India

MARCEL DEKKER, INC.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

NEW YORK • BASEL

Transferred to Digital Printing 2005
Although great care has been taken to provide accurate and current information, neither the
author(s) nor the publisher, nor anyone else associated with this publication, shall be liable
for any loss, damage, or liability directly or indirectly caused or alleged to be caused by this
book. The material contained herein is not intended to provide specific advice or recommendations for any specific situation.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 0-8247-5653-3
Headquarters
Marcel Dekker, Inc., 270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, U.S.A.
tel: 212–696–9000; fax: 212–685–4540
Distribution and Customer Service
Marcel Dekker, Inc., Cimarron Road, Monticello, New York 12701, U.S.A.
tel: 800–228–1160; fax: 845–796–1772
Eastern Hemisphere Distribution
Marcel Dekker AG, Hutgasse 4, Postfach 812, CH-4001 Basel, Switzerland
tel: 41–61–260–6300; fax: 41–61–260–6333
World Wide Web
http://www.dekker.com
The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in bulk quantities. For more
information, write to Special Sales/Professional Marketing at the headquarters address above.
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
Current printing (last digit):
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Foreword

It is a great pleasure to welcome this new book from Prof. S.V.Kulkarni and Prof.
S.A.Khaparde, and I congratulate them for the comprehensive treatment given in
the book to nearly all aspects of transformer engineering.
Everyone involved in or with the subject area of this book, whether from
academics or industry, knows that the last decade has been particularly dynamic
and fast changing. Significant advances have been made in design, analysis and
diagnostic techniques for transformers. The enabling factors for this
technological leap are extremely competitive market conditions, tremendous
improvements in computational facilities and rapid advances in instrumentation.
The phenomenal growth and increasing complexity of power systems have put up
tremendous responsibilities on the transformer industry to supply reliable
transformers. The transformer as a system consists of several components and it is
absolutely essential that the integrity of all these components individually and as
a system is ensured. A transformer is a complex three-dimensional
electromagnetic structure, and it is subjected to variety of stresses, viz. dielectric,
thermal, electrodynamic, etc. In-depth understanding of various phenomena
occurring inside the transformer is necessary. Most of these can now be simulated
on computers so that suitable changes can be made at the design stage to eliminate
potential problems.
I find that many of these challenges in the design and manufacture of
transformers, to be met in fast changing market conditions and technological
options, are elaborated in this book. There is a nice blend of theory and practice in
almost every topic discussed in the text. The academic background of the authors
has ensured that a thorough theoretical treatment is given to important topics. A
number of landmark references are cited at appropriate places. The previous
industry experience of S.V.Kulkarni is reflected in many discussions in the book.
The various theories have been supported in the text by reference to actual
practices. For example, while deliberating on various issues of stray loss
estimation and control, the relevant theory of eddy currents has been first
explained. This theoretical basis is then used to explain various design and
iii
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

iv

Foreword

manufacturing practices established in the industry to analyze and minimize the
stray losses in the windings and structural components. The design and
manufacturing practices and processes have significant impact on the
performance parameters of the transformers, and the same have been identified in
the text while discussing various topics.
Wherever required, a number of examples and case studies are given which are
of great practical value. The knowledge of zero-sequence characteristics of
transformers is very important for utilities. It is essential to understand the
difference between magnetizing and leakage zero-sequence reactances of the
transformer. These two types of zero-sequence reactances are explained in the
book for three-phase three-limb, three-phase five-limb and single-phase threelimb transformers with numerical examples. One may not find such a detailed
treatment to zero-sequence reactances in the available literature. The effect of
tank on the zero-sequence reactance characteristics is lucidly explained.
The discussions on the sympathetic inrush phenomenon, part-winding
resonance, short-circuit withstand characteristics and noise reduction techniques
should also be quite useful to the readers. With the increase in network complexity
and severity of loads in some cases, the cooperation between the transformer
manufacturers and users (utilities) is very critical. The design reviews with the
involvement of users at various stages of contract should help in enhancing the
reliability of transformers. I am happy to note that such areas of cooperation are
identified at appropriate places in the text.
The book propagates the use of modern computational tools for optimization
and quality enhancement of transformers. I know a number of previously
published works of the authors in which Finite Element Method (FEM) has been
applied for the stray loss control and insulation design of the transformers. The use
of FEM has been aptly demonstrated in the book for various calculations along
with some tips, which will be helpful to a novice in FEM.
The book is therefore a major contribution to the literature. The book will be
extremely helpful and handy to the transformer industry and users. It will be also
useful for teaching transformers to undergraduate and postgraduate students in
universities. The thorough treatment of all-important aspects of transformer
engineering given will provide the reader all the necessary background to pursue
research and development activities in the domain of transformers.
It is anticipated that this book will become an essential reference for engineers
concerned with design, application, planning, installation, and maintenance of
power transformers.
H.Jin Sim, PE
VP, Waukesha Electric Systems
Past Chairman, IEEE Transformers Committee

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Preface

In the last decade, rapid advancements and developments have taken place in the
design, analysis, manufacturing and condition-monitoring technologies of
transformers. The technological progress will continue in the forthcoming years.
The phenomenal growth of power systems has put tremendous responsibilities on
the transformer industry to supply reliable and cost-effective transformers.
There is a continuous increase in ratings of generator transformers and
autotransformers. Further, the ongoing trend to go for higher system voltages for
transmission increases the voltage rating of transformers. The increase in current
and voltage ratings calls for special design and manufacturing considerations.
Advanced computational techniques have to be used that should be backed up by
experimental verification to ensure quality of design and manufacturing
processes. Some of the vital design challenges are: stray loss control, accurate
prediction of winding hot spots, short-circuit withstand capability and reliable
insulation design. With the increase in MVA ratings, the weight and size of large
transformers approach or exceed transport and manufacturing capability limits.
Also, due to the ever-increasing competition in the global market, there are
continual efforts to optimize the material content in transformers. Therefore, the
difference between withstand levels (e.g., short circuit, dielectric) and
corresponding operating stress levels is diminishing. Similarly, the guaranteed
performance figures and actual test values are now very close. All these factors
demand greater efforts from researchers and designers for accurate calculation of
various stress levels and performance figures for the transformers. In addition,
strict control of manufacturing processes is required. Manufacturing variations of
components should be monitored and controlled.
Many of the standard books on transformers are now more than 10 years old.
Some of these books are still relevant and widely referred for understanding the
theory and operation of transformers. However, a comprehensive theoretical basis
together with application of modern computational techniques is necessary to
face the challenges of fast-changing and demanding conditions. This book is an
effort in that direction. The principles of various physical phenomena occurring
v
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

vi

Preface

within a transformer are explained elaborately in the text, which could also be
used in a course at the undergraduate or postgraduate level. Wherever required,
adequate references have been cited so that readers can explore the phenomena in
more depth. In fact, a large number of very useful references (more than 400) is one
of the hallmarks of this book. Some of the references—classic sources that date
back to the early part of the last century—explain many of the theories useful in
transformer engineering. Some most recent works are also discussed to give
readers a feel for the latest trends in transformer technology.
The first author worked in the transformer industry for 11 years before joining
academia. He has vast experience in the design and development of transformers,
from the small distribution range to 400 kV class 300 MVA ratings. He had ample
opportunity to investigate problems in transformer operations and sites. A few
case studies and site investigations in which he was actively involved have been
incorporated at appropriate places in the text. Also, he found that some aspects of
transformer engineering had not been given adequate treatment in the books
available. Hence, the emphasis of this book is on these aspects: magnetizing
asymmetry, zero-sequence reactance characteristics, stray losses and related
theory of eddy currents, short-circuit forces and withstand, part winding
resonance phenomena, insulation design, and design aspects of transformers for
rectifier, furnace and HVDC applications. The book will be particularly useful to:
(1)

(2)

(3)

Transformer designers and researchers engaged in optimization and
quality-enhancement activities in today’s competitive
environment
Utility engineers who would like to learn more about the system
interaction aspects of transformers in an interconnected power
system to improve on specifications and employ diagnostic tools
for condition monitoring
Undergraduate and postgraduate students who wish to integrate
traditional transformer theory with modern computing practices

In Chapter 1, in addition to the transformer fundamentals, various types of
transformers in a typical power system are explained along with their features.
There is a trend to use better materials to reduce core losses. Often the expected
loss reduction is not obtained with these better grades. The design and
manufacturing practices and processes that have significant impact on the core
performance are highlighted in Chapter 2. The three-phase three-limb core has
inherent magnetizing asymmetry that sometimes results in widely different noload current and losses in three phases of the transformer during the no-load loss
measurement by the three-wattmeter method. It is shown that one of the three
wattmeters can have a negative reading depending on the magnitude of
asymmetry between phases and the level of excitation. Although the inrush
current phenomenon is well understood, the sympathetic inrush phenomenon—
in which the magnetization level of a transformer is affected by energization of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Preface

vii

another interconnected transformer—is not well known. The factors influencing
the phenomenon are elucidated in the chapter. The phenomenon was investigated
by the first author in 1993 based on switching tests conducted at a site.
Chapter 3 is devoted to reactance of transformers, which can be calculated by
either analytical or numerical methods. Procedures for the calculation of
reactance of various types and configurations of windings, including zigzag and
sandwich windings, are illustrated. The reactance for complex winding
configurations can be easily calculated by the finite element method (FEM),
which is the most widely used numerical method. The chapter gives exhaustive
treatment of zero-sequence characteristics of the transformers. Procedures for
calculation of the magnetizing zero-sequence and leakage zero-sequence
reactances of the transformers are illustrated through examples (such a treatment is
unusual in the published literature). The effect of the presence of delta winding on
the zero-sequence reactance is also explained.
In order to accurately estimate and control the stray losses in windings and
structural parts, an in-depth understanding of the fundamentals of eddy currents
starting from the basics of electromagnetic fields is desirable. The treatment of
eddy currents given in Chapter 4 is self-contained and useful for the conceptual
understanding of the phenomena of stray losses in the windings and structural
components of transformers described in Chapters 4 and 5, respectively. Stray
losses in all the conducting components of the transformers have been given
elaborate treatment. Different analytical and numerical approaches for their
estimation are discussed and compared. A number of useful guidelines, graphs and
equations are given that can be used by practicing engineers. A few interesting
phenomena observed during the load-loss test of transformers are explained (e.g.,
the half turn effect). Various shielding arrangements for effective stray loss control
are discussed and compared.
Failure of transformers due to short circuits is a major concern for transformer
users. The success rate during actual short-circuit tests is far from satisfactory. The
static force and withstand calculations are well established. Efforts are being made
to standardize and improve the dynamic short-circuit calculations. A number of
precautions (around 40) that can be taken at the specification, design and
manufacturing stages of transformers for improvement in short-circuit withstand
are elaborated in Chapter 6. The various failure mechanisms and factors that
determine the withstand strength are explained.
Although methods for calculating impulse distribution are well established,
failures of large transformers due to part-winding resonance and very fast transient
overvoltages have attracted the attention of researchers. After an explanation of
the methods for calculating series capacitances of commonly used windings,
analytical and numerical methods for transient analysis are discussed in Chapter
7. The results of three different methods are presented for a typical winding.
Methods for avoiding winding resonances are also explained.
Chapter 8 examines in detail the insulation design philosophy. Various factors
that affect insulation strength are summarized. The formulae given for bulk oil

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

viii

Preface

and creepage withstand are very useful to designers. Procedures for the design of
major and minor insulation systems are presented.
Chapter 9 deals with the thermal aspects of transformer design. After a
description of the modes of heat transfer, various cooling systems are described.
The insulation aging phenomenon and life expectancy are also discussed. A
number of recent failures of large transformers have been attributed to the static
electrification phenomenon, which is explained at the end of the chapter.
Various types of loads and tests that determine aspects of structural design are
discussed in Chapter 10. Tank-stiffening arrangements are elaborated. This
material has been scarce in the available literature. Because of increasing
environmental concerns, many users are specifying transformers with lower noise
levels. Different noise level reduction techniques are discussed and compared.
Chapter 11 is devoted to four special transformers: rectifier transformers,
HVDC converter transformers, furnace transformers and phase-shifting
transformers. Their design aspects and features, different from those of
conventional distribution and power transformers, are enumerated.
The text concludes by identifying current research and development trends.
The last chapter is intended to give pointers to readers desirous of pursuing
research in transformers.
Even though the transformer is a mature product, there are still a number of
design, manufacturing and power system interaction issues that continue to
attract the attention of researchers. This book addresses many of these issues and
provides leads to most of the remaining ones. It encompasses all the important
aspects of transformer engineering including the recent advances in research and
development activities. It also propagates the use of advanced computational
tools such as FEM for optimization and quality enhancement of transformers.
S.V.Kulkarni
S.A.Khaparde

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues in the Electrical Engineering Department
of the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, for their support and
encouragement. In particular, we are grateful to Profs. R.K.Shevgaonkar, S.A.
Soman, B.G.Fernandes, V.R.Sule, M.B.Patil, A.M.Kulkarni and Kishore
Chatterjee, for their help in reviewing the book. Thanks are also due to Mr. V.
K.Tandon, who suggested editorial corrections.
Research associates Mr. Sainath Bongane, Mr. Sachin Thakkar and Mr. G.
D.Patil helped tremendously, and the excellent quality of the figures is due to their
efforts. Ph.D. students Mr. G.B.Kumbhar, Mr. A.P.Agalgaonkar and Mr. M.U.Nabi
also contributed in the refining of some topics in the book.
Previously, S.V.Kulkarni worked in Crompton Greaves Limited in the area of
design and development of transformers. He sincerely acknowledges the rich and
ample experience gained while working in the industry and is grateful to all his
erstwhile senior colleagues. He would particularly like to express his sincere
gratitude to Mr. C.R.Varier, Mr. T.K.Mukherjee, Mr. D.A.Koppikar, Mr.
S.V.Manerikar, Mr. B.A.Subramanyam, Mr. G.S.Gulwadi, Mr. K. Vijayan, Mr.
V.K.Lakhiani, Mr. P.V.Mathai, Mr. A.N.Kumthekar and Mr. K.V.Pawaskar for their
support and guidance.
Many practical aspects of transformer technology are discussed in the book.
Hence, it was essential to have those sections reviewed by practicing transformer
experts. Mr. V.S.Joshi’s valuable suggestions and comments on almost all the
chapters resulted in refinement of the discussion on many practical points. Mr.
K.Vijayan, with his expertise on insulation design, contributed significantly in
refining Chapter 8. He also gave useful comments on Chapter 9. We thank Mr.
G.S.Gulwadi for reviewing Chapters 1 and 8. Mr. V.D.Deodhar helped to improve
Chapter 10.
We are also thankful to Dr. B.N.Jayaram for reviewing Chapter 7. The efforts of
Dr. G.Bhat in improving Chapter 9 are greatly appreciated. Mr. V.K. Reddy
contributed significantly to Chapter 10. Mr. M.W.Ranadive gave useful
suggestions on some topics. We are grateful to Prof. J.Turowski, Mr. P.
Ramachandran and Prof. L.Satish for constructive comments.
Ms. Rita Lazazzaro and Ms. Dana Bigelow of Marcel Dekker, Inc., constantly
supported us and gave good editorial input.
Finally, the overwhelming support and encouragement of our family members
is admirable. S.V.Kulkarni would like to particularly mention the sacrifice made
and moral support given by his wife, Sushama.

ix
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Contents

Foreword Jin Sim
Preface
Acknowledgements

iii
v
ix

1

Transformer Fundamentals
1.1
Perspective
1.2
Applications and Types of Transformers
1.3
Principles and Equivalent Circuit of a Transformer
1.4
Representation of Transformer in Power System
1.5
Open-Circuit and Short-Circuit Tests
1.6
Voltage Regulation and Efficiency
1.7
Parallel Operation of Transformers
References

1
1
5
11
20
23
25
33
34

2

Magnetic Characteristics
2.1
Construction
2.2
Hysteresis and Eddy Losses
2.3
Excitation Characteristics
2.4
Over-Excitation Performance
2.5
No-Load Loss Test
2.6
Impact of Manufacturing Processes on Core Performance
2.7
Inrush Current
2.8
Influence of Core Construction and Winding
Connections on No-Load Harmonic Phenomenon
2.9
Transformer Noise
References

35
36
42
44
46
46
54
56
67
69
72
xi

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

xii

Contents

3

Impedance Characteristics
3.1
Reactance Calculation
3.2
Different Approaches for Reactance Calculation
3.3
Two-Dimensional Analytical Methods
3.4
Numerical Method for Reactance Calculation
3.5
Impedance Characteristics of Three-Winding Transformer
3.6
Reactance Calculation for Zigzag Transformer
3.7
Zero-Sequence Reactance Estimation
3.8
Stabilizing Tertiary Winding
References

77
78
85
88
90
98
103
108
121
123

4

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses
4.1
Field Equations
4.2
Poynting Vector
4.3
Eddy Current and Hysteresis Losses
4.4
Effect of Saturation
4.5
Eddy Loss in a Transformer Winding
4.6
Circulating Current Loss in Transformer Windings
References

127
128
133
137
139
141
155
166

5

Stray Losses in Structural Components
5.1
Factors Influencing Stray Losses
5.2
Overview of Methods for Stray Loss Estimation
5.3
Core Edge Loss
5.4
Stray Loss in Frames
5.5
Stray Loss in Flitch Plates
5.6
Stray Loss in Tank
5.7
Stray Loss in Bushing Mounting Plates
5.8
Evaluation of Stray Loss Due to High Current Leads
5.9
Measures for Stray Loss Control
5.10 Methods for Experimental Verification
5.11 Estimation of Stray Losses in Overexcitation Condition
5.12 Load Loss Measurement
References

169
171
182
184
185
187
192
197
199
206
214
216
218
224

6

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength
6.1
Short Circuit Currents
6.2
Thermal Capability at Short Circuit
6.3
Short Circuit Forces
6.4
Dynamic Behavior Under Short Circuits
6.5
Failure Modes Due to Radial Forces
6.6
Failure Modes Due to Axial Forces

231
232
239
240
247
251
254

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Contents

xiii

6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
6.11
6.12

Effect of Pre-Stress
Short Circuit Test
Effect of Inrush Current
Split-Winding Transformers
Short Circuit Withstand
Calculation of Electrodynamic Force Between
Parallel Conductors
6.13 Design of Clamping Structures
References

260
260
261
262
264

Surge Phenomena in Transformers
7.1
Initial Voltage Distrubution
7.2
Capacitance Calculations
7.3
Capacitance of Windings
7.4
Inductance Calculation
7.5
Standing Waves and Traveling Waves
7.6
Methods for Analysis of Impulse Distribution
7.7
Computation of Impulse Voltage Distribution
Using State Variable Method
7.8
Winding Design for Reducing Internal Overvoltages
References

277
277
282
286
298
300
303

7

268
270
272

306
314
321

8

Insulation Design
327
8.1
Calculation of Stresses for Simple Configurations
328
8.2
Field Computations
333
8.3
Factors Affecting Insulation Strength
335
8.4
Test Methods and Design Insulation Level (DIL)
348
8.5
Insulation Between Two Windings
351
8.6
Internal Insulation
353
8.7
Design of End Insulation
356
8.8
High-Voltage Lead Clearances
358
8.9
Statistical Analysis for Optimization and Quality Enhancement 361
References
362

9

Cooling Systems
9.1
Modes of Heat Transfer
9.2
Cooling Arrangements
9.3
Dissipation of Core Heat
9.4
Dissipation of Winding Heat
9.5
Aging and Life Expectancy
9.6
Direct Hot Spot Measurement
9.7
Static Electrification Phenomenon
References

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

367
368
370
375
376
380
384
385
387

xiv

Contents

10 Structural Design
10.1 Importance of Structural Design
10.2 Different Types of Loads and Tests
10.3 Classification of Transformer Tanks
10.4 Tank Design
10.5 Methods of Analysis
10.6 Overpressure Phenomenon in Transformers
10.7 Seismic Analysis
10.8 Transformer Noise: Characteristics and Reduction
References

389
389
390
392
395
397
401
403
404
409

11 Special Transformers
11.1 Rectifier Transformers
11.2 Converter Transformers for HVDC
11.3 Furnace Transformers
11.4 Phase Shifting Transformers
References

411
411
417
424
428
433

12 Recent Trends in Transformer Technology
12.1 Magnetic Circuit
12.2 Windings
12.3 Insulation
12.4 Challenges in Design and Manufacture of Transformers
12.5 Computer-Aided Design and Analysis
12.6 Monitoring and Diagnostics
12.7 Life Assessment and Refurbishment
References

437
437
438
440
441
443
445
449
449

Appendix A: Fault Calculations
A1
Asymmetrical Fault with No In-Feed from LV Side
A2
Asymmetrical Fault with In-Feed from LV Side

453
454
457

Appendix B: Stress and Capacitance Formulae
B1
Stress Calculations
B2
Capacitance Calculations

459
459
467

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer
Engineering

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

1
Transformer Fundamentals

1.1 Perspective
A transformer is a static device that transfers electrical energy from one circuit to
another by electromagnetic induction without the change in frequency. The
transformer, which can link circuits with different voltages, has been instrumental
in enabling universal use of the alternating current system for transmission and
distribution of electrical energy. Various components of power system, viz.
generators, transmission lines, distribution networks and finally the loads, can be
operated at their most suited voltage levels. As the transmission voltages are
increased to higher levels in some part of the power system, transformers again
play a key role in interconnection of systems at different voltage levels.
Transformers occupy prominent positions in the power system, being the vital
links between generating stations and points of utilization.
The transformer is an electromagnetic conversion device in which electrical
energy received by primary winding is first converted into magnetic energy which
is reconverted back into a useful electrical energy in other circuits (secondary
winding, tertiary winding, etc.). Thus, the primary and secondary windings are not
connected electrically, but coupled magnetically. A transformer is termed as either
a step-up or step-down transformer depending upon whether the secondary
voltage is higher or lower than the primary voltage, respectively. Transformers can
be used to either step-up or step-down voltage depending upon the need and
application; hence their windings are referred as high-voltage/low-voltage or
high-tension/low-tension windings in place of primary/secondary windings.
Magnetic circuit: Electrical energy transfer between two circuits takes place
through a transformer without the use of moving parts; the transformer therefore
has higher efficiency and low maintenance cost as compared to rotating electrical
1
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

2

Chapter 1

machines. There are continuous developments and introductions of better grades
of core material. The important stages of core material development can be
summarized as: non-oriented silicon steel, hot rolled grain oriented silicon steel,
cold rolled grain oriented (CRGO) silicon steel, Hi-B, laser scribed and
mechanically scribed. The last three materials are improved versions of CRGO.
Saturation flux density has remained more or less constant around 2.0 Tesla for
CRGO; but there is a continuous improvement in watts/kg and volt-amperes/kg
characteristics in the rolling direction. The core material developments are
spearheaded by big steel manufacturers, and the transformer designers can
optimize the performance of core by using efficient design and manufacturing
technologies. The core building technology has improved from the non-mitred to
mitred and then to the step-lap construction. A trend of reduction of transformer
core losses in the last few years is the result of a considerable increase in energy
costs. The better grades of core steel not only reduce the core loss but they also
help in reducing the noise level by few decibels. Use of amorphous steel for
transformer cores results in substantial core loss reduction (loss is about one-third
that of CRGO silicon steel). Since the manufacturing technology of handling this
brittle material is difficult, its use in transformers is not widespread.
Windings: The rectangular paper-covered copper conductor is the most
commonly used conductor for the windings of medium and large power
transformers. These conductors can be individual strip conductors, bunched
conductors or continuously transposed cable (CTC) conductors. In low voltage
side of a distribution transformer, where much fewer turns are involved, the use of
copper or aluminum foils may find preference. To enhance the short circuit
withstand capability, the work hardened copper is commonly used instead of soft
annealed copper, particularly for higher rating transformers. In the case of a
generator transformer having high current rating, the CTC conductor is mostly
used which gives better space factor and reduced eddy losses in windings. When
the CTC conductor is used in transformers, it is usually of epoxy bonded type to
enhance its short circuit strength. Another variety of copper conductor or
aluminum conductor is with the thermally upgraded insulating paper, which is
suitable for hot-spot temperature of about 110°C. It is possible to meet the special
overloading conditions with the help of this insulating paper. Moreover, the aging
of winding insulation material will be slowed down comparatively. For better
mechanical properties, the epoxy diamond dot paper can be used as an interlayer
insulation for a multi-layer winding. High temperature superconductors may find
their application in power transformers which are expected to be available
commercially within next few years. Their success shall depend on economic
viability, ease of manufacture and reliability considerations.
Insulation and cooling: Pre-compressed pressboard is used in windings as
opposed to the softer materials used in earlier days. The major insulation (between
windings, between winding and yoke, etc.) consists of a number of oil ducts

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

3

formed by suitably spaced insulating cylinders/barriers. Well profiled angle rings,
angle caps and other special insulation components are also used.
Mineral oil has traditionally been the most commonly used electrical insulating
medium and coolant in transformers. Studies have proved that oil-barrier
insulation system can be used at the rated voltages greater than 1000 kV. A high
dielectric strength of oil-impregnated paper and pressboard is the main reason for
using oil as the most important constituent of the transformer insulation system.
Manufacturers have used silicon-based liquid for insulation and cooling. Due to
non-toxic dielectric and self-extinguishing properties, it is selected as a
replacement of Askarel. High cost of silicon is an inhibiting factor for its
widespread use. Super-biodegradable vegetable seed based oils are also available
for use in environmentally sensitive locations.
There is considerable advancement in the technology of gas immersed
transformers in recent years. SF6 gas has excellent dielectric strength and is nonflammable. Hence, SF6 transformers find their application in the areas where firehazard prevention is of paramount importance. Due to lower specific gravity of
SF6 gas, the gas insulated transformer is usually lighter than the oil insulated
transformer. The dielectric strength of SF6 gas is a function of the operating
pressure; the higher the pressure, the higher the dielectric strength. However, the
heat capacity and thermal time constant of SF6 gas are smaller than that of oil,
resulting in reduced overload capacity of SF6 transformers as compared to oilimmersed transformers. Environmental concerns, sealing problems, lower
cooling capability and present high cost of manufacture are the challenges which
have to be overcome for the widespread use of SF6 cooled transformers.
Dry-type resin cast and resin impregnated transformers use class F or C
insulation. High cost of resins and lower heat dissipation capability limit the use of
these transformers to small ratings. The dry-type transformers are primarily used
for the indoor application in order to minimize fire hazards. Nomex paper
insulation, which has temperature withstand capacity of 220°C, is widely used for
dry-type transformers. The initial cost of a dry-type transformer may be 60 to 70%
higher than that of an oil-cooled transformer at current prices, but its overall cost
at the present level of energy rate can be very much comparable to that of the oilcooled transformer.
Design: With the rapid development of digital computers, the designers are freed
from the drudgery of routine calculations. Computers are widely used for
optimization of transformer design. Within a matter of a few minutes, today’s
computers can work out a number of designs (by varying flux density, core
diameter, current density, etc.) and come up with an optimum design. The real
benefit due to computers is in the area of analysis. Using commercial 2-D/3-D
field computation software, any kind of engineering analysis (electrostatic,
electromagnetic, structural, thermal, etc.) can be performed for optimization and
reliability enhancement of transformers.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

4

Chapter 1

Manufacturing: In manufacturing technology, superior techniques listed below
are used to reduce manufacturing time and at the same time to improve the product
quality:
- High degree of automation for slitting/cutting operations to achieve better
dimensional accuracy for the core laminations
- Step-lap joint for core construction to achieve a lower core loss and noise level;
top yoke is assembled after lowering windings and insulation at the assembly
stage
- Automated winding machines for standard distribution transformers
- Vapour phase drying for effective and fast drying (moisture removal) and
cleaning
- Low frequency heating for the drying process of distribution transformers
- Pressurized chambers for windings and insulating parts to protect against
pollution and dirt
- Vertical machines for winding large capacity transformer coils
- Isostatic clamping for accurate sizing of windings
- High frequency brazing for joints in the windings and connections
Accessories: Bushings and tap changer (off-circuit and on-load) are the most
important accessories of a transformer. The technology of bushing manufacture
has advanced from the oil impregnated paper (OIP) type to resin impregnated
paper (RIP) type, both of which use porcelain insulators. The silicon rubber
bushings are also available for oil-to-air applications. Due to high elasticity and
strength of the silicon rubber material, the strength of these bushings against
mechanical stresses and shocks is higher. The oil-to-SF6 bushings are used in GIS
(gas insulated substation) applications.
The service reliability of on load tap changers is of vital importance since the
continuity of the transformer depends on the performance of tap changer for the
entire (expected) life span of 30 to 40 years. It is well known that the tap changer
failure is one of the principal causes of failure of transformers. Tap changers,
particularly on-load tap changers (OLTC), must be inspected at regular intervals
to maintain a high level of operating reliability. Particular attention must be given
for inspecting the diverter switch unit, oil, shafts and motor drive unit. The
majority of failures reported in service are due to mechanical problems related to
the drive system, for which improvements in design may be necessary. For service
reliability of OLTCs, several monitoring methods have been proposed, which
include measurement of contact resistance, monitoring of drive motor torque/
current, acoustic measurements, dissolved gas analysis and temperature rise
measurements.
Diagnostic techniques: Several on-line and off-line diagnostic tools are available
for monitoring of transformers to provide information about their operating
conditions. Cost of these tools should be lower and their performance reliability

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

5

should be higher for their widespread use. The field experience in some of the
monitoring techniques is very much limited. A close cooperation between
manufacturers and utilities is necessary for developing good monitoring and
diagnostic systems for transformers.
Transformer technology is developing at a tremendous rate. The computerized
methods are replacing the manual working in the design. Continuous
improvements in material and manufacturing technologies along with the use of
advanced computational tools have contributed in making transformers more
efficient, compact and reliable. The modern information technology, advanced
diagnostic tools and several emerging trends in transformer applications are
expected to fulfill a number of existing and future requirements of utilities and
end-users of transformers.

1.2 Applications and Types of Transformers
Before invention of transformers, in initial days of electrical industry, power was
distributed as direct current at low voltage. The voltage drop in lines limited the
use of electricity to only urban areas where consumers were served with
distribution circuits of small length. All the electrical equipment had to be
designed for the same voltage. Development of the first transformer around 1885
dramatically changed transmission and distribution systems. The alternating
current (AC) power generated at a low voltage could be stepped up for the
transmission purpose to higher voltage and lower current, reducing voltage drops
and transmission losses. Use of transformers made it possible to transmit the
power economically hundreds of kilometers away from the generating station.
Step-down transformers then reduced the voltage at the receiving stations for
distribution of power at various standardized voltage levels for its use by the
consumers. Transformers have made AC systems quite flexible because the
various parts and equipment of the power system can be operated at economical
voltage levels by use of transformers with suitable voltage ratio. A single-line
diagram of a typical power system is shown in figure 1.1. The voltage levels
mentioned in the figure are different in different countries depending upon their
system design. Transformers can be broadly classified, depending upon their
application as given below.
a. Generator transformers: Power generated at a generating station (usually at
a voltage in the range of 11 to 25 kV) is stepped up by a generator transformer to
a higher voltage (220, 345, 400 or 765 kV) for transmission. The generator
transformer is one of the most important and critical components of the power
system. It usually has a fairly uniform load. Generator transformers are designed
with higher losses since the cost of supplying losses is cheapest at the generating
station. Lower noise level is usually not essential as other equipment in the
generating station may be much noisier than the transformer.
Generator transformers are usually provided with off-circuit tap changer with a

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

6

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Chapter 1

Figure 1.1 Different types of transformers in a typical power system

Transformer Fundamentals

7

small variation in voltage (e.g., ±5%) because the voltage can always be
controlled by field of the generator. Generator transformers with OLTC are also
used for reactive power control of the system. They may be provided with a
compact unit cooler arrangement for want of space in the generating stations
(transformers with unit coolers have only one rating with oil forced and air forced
cooling arrangement). Alternatively, they may also have oil to water heat
exchangers for the same reason. It may be economical to design the tap winding as
a part of main HV winding and not as a separate winding. This may be permissible
since axial short circuit forces are lower due to a small tapping range. Special care
has to be taken while designing high current LV lead termination to avoid any hotspot in the conducting metallic structural parts in its vicinity. The epoxy bonded
CTC conductor is commonly used for LV winding to minimize eddy losses and
provide greater short circuit strength. Severe overexcitation conditions are taken
into consideration while designing generator transformers.
b. Unit auxiliary transformers: These are step-down transformers with primary
connected to generator output directly. The secondary voltage is of the order of 6.9
kV for supplying to various auxiliary equipment in the generating station.
c. Station transformers: These transformers are required to supply auxiliary
equipment during setting up of the generating station and subsequently during
each start-up operation. The rating of these transformers is small, and their
primary is connected to a high voltage transmission line. This may result in a
smaller conductor size for HV winding, necessitating special measures for
increasing the short circuit strength. The split secondary winding arrangement is
often employed to have economical circuit breaker ratings.
d. Interconnecting transformers: These are normally autotransformers used to
interconnect two grids/systems operating at two different system voltages (say,
400 and 220 kV or 345 and 138 kV). They are normally located in the
transmission system between the generator transformer and receiving end
transformer, and in this case they reduce the transmission voltage (400 or 345 kV)
to the sub-transmission level (220 or 138 kV). In autotransformers, there is no
electrical isolation between primary and secondary windings; some volt-amperes
are conductively transformed and remaining are inductively transformed.
Autotransformer design becomes more economical as the ratio of secondary
voltage to primary voltage approaches towards unity. These are characterized by a
wide tapping range and an additional tertiary winding which may be loaded or
unloaded. Unloaded tertiary acts as a stabilizing winding by providing a path for
the third harmonic currents. Synchronous condensers or shunt reactors are
connected to the tertiary winding, if required, for reactive power compensation. In
the case of an unloaded tertiary, adequate conductor area and proper supporting
arrangement are provided for withstanding short circuit forces under
asymmetrical fault conditions.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

8

Chapter 1

e. Receiving station transformers: These are basically step-down transformers
reducing transmission/sub-transmission voltage to primary feeder level (e.g., 33
kV). Some of these may be directly supplying an industrial plant. Loads on these
transformers vary over wider limits, and their losses are expensive. The farther the
location of transformers from the generating station, the higher the cost of
supplying the losses. Automatic tap changing on load is usually necessary, and
tapping range is higher to account for wide variation in the voltage. A lower noise
level is desirable if they are close to residential areas.
f. Distribution transformers: Using distribution transformers, the primary feeder
voltage is reduced to actual utilization voltage (~415 or 460 V) for domestic/
industrial use. A great variety of transformers fall into this category due to many
different arrangements and connections. Load on these transformers varies
widely, and they are often overloaded. A lower value of no-load loss is desirable to
improve all-day efficiency. Hence, the no-load loss is usually capitalized with a
high rate at the tendering stage. Since very little supervision is possible, users
expect the least maintenance on these transformers. The cost of supplying losses
and reactive power is highest for these transformers.
Classification of transformers as above is based on their location and broad
function in the power system. Transformers can be further classified as per their
specific application as given below. In this chapter, only main features are
highlighted; details of some of them are discussed in the subsequent chapters.
g. Phase shifting transformers: These are used to control power flow over
transmission lines by varying the phase angle between input and output voltages
of the transformer. Through a proper tap change, the output voltage can be made
to either lead or lag the input voltage. The amount of phase shift required directly
affects the rating and size of the transformer. Presently, there are two types of
design: single-core and two-core design. Single-core design is used for small
phase shifts and lower MVA/voltage ratings. Two-core design is normally used for
bulk power transfer with large ratings of phase shifting transformers. It consists of
two transformers, one associated with the line terminals and other with the tap
changer.
h. Earthing or grounding transformers: These are used to get a neutral point that
facilitates grounding and detection of earth faults in an ungrounded part of a
network (e.g., the delta connected systems). The windings are usually connected
in the zigzag manner, which helps in eliminating third harmonic voltages in the
lines. These transformers have the advantage that they are not affected by a DC
magnetization.
i. Transformers for rectifier and inverter circuits: These are otherwise normal
transformers except for the special design and manufacturing features to take into
account the harmonic effects. Due to extra harmonic losses, operating flux density

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

9

in core is kept lower (around 1.6 Tesla) and also conductor dimensions are smaller
for these transformers. A proper de-rating factor is applied depending upon the
magnitudes of various harmonic components. A designer has to adequately check
the electromagnetic and thermal aspects of design. For transformers used with
HVDC converters, insulation design is the most challenging design aspect. The
insulation has to be designed for combined AC-DC voltage stresses.
j. Furnace duty transformers: These are used to feed the arc or induction
furnaces. They are characterized by a low secondary voltage (80 to 1000 V) and
high current (10 to 60 kA) depending upon the MVA rating. Non-magnetic steel is
invariably used for the LV lead termination and tank in the vicinity of LV leads to
eliminate hot spots and minimize stray losses. High current bus-bars are
interleaved to reduce the leakage reactance. For very high current cases, the LV
terminals are in the form of U-shaped copper tubes of certain inside and outside
diameters so that they can be cooled by oil/water circulation from inside. In many
cases, a booster transformer is used along with the main transformer to reduce the
rating of tap-changers.
k. Freight loco transformers: These are mounted on the locomotives within the
engine compartment itself. The primary voltage collected from an overhead line is
stepped down to an appropriate level by these transformers for feeding to the
rectifiers, whose output DC voltage drives the locomotives. The structural design
should be such that it can withstand vibrations. Analysis of natural frequencies of
vibration is done to eliminate possibility of resonance.
l. Hermetically sealed transformers: This construction does not permit any
outside atmospheric air to get into the tank. It is completely sealed without any
breathing arrangement, obviating need of periodic filtration and other normal
maintenance. These transformers are filled with mineral oil or synthetic liquid as a
cooling/dielectric medium and sealed completely by having an inert gas, like
nitrogen, between the coolant and top tank plate. The tank is of welded cover
construction, eliminating the joint and related leakage problems. Here, the
expansion of oil is absorbed by the inert gas layer. The tank design should be
suitable for pressure buildup at elevated temperatures. The cooling is not effective
at the surface of oil, which is at the highest temperature. In another type of sealed
construction, these disadvantages are overcome by deletion of the gas layer. The
expansion of oil is absorbed by the deformation of the cooling system, which can
be an integral part of the tank structure.
m. Outdoor and indoor transformers: Most of the transformers are of outdoor
duty type, which have to be designed for withstanding atmospheric pollutants.
The creepage distance of bushing insulator gets decided according to the
pollution level. The higher the pollution level, the greater the creepage distance
required from the live terminal to ground. Contrary to the outdoor transformers,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

10

Chapter 1

an indoor transformer is designed for installation under a weatherproof roof and/
or in a properly ventilated room. Standards define the minimum ventilation
required for an effective cooling. Adequate clearances are kept between the
walls and transformer to eliminate the possibility of higher noise level due to
reverberations.
There are many more types of transformers having applications in electronics,
electric heaters, traction, etc. Some applications have significant impact on the
design of transformers. The duty (load) of transformers can be very onerous. For
example, current density in transformers with frequent motor starting duty has to
be lower to take care of high starting current of motors, which can be of the order
of 6 to 8 times the full load current.
Shunt and series reactors are very important components of the power system.
Design of reactors, which have only one winding, is similar to transformers in
many aspects. Their special features are given below.
n. Shunt Reactors: These are used to compensate the capacitive VARs generated
during low loads and switching operations in extra high voltage transmission
networks, thereby maintaining the voltage profile of a transmission line within
desirable limits. These are installed at a number of places along the length of the
line. They can be either permanently connected or switched type. Use of shunt
reactors under normal operating conditions may result in poor voltage levels and
increased losses. Hence, the switched-in types are better since they are connected
only when the voltage levels are required to be controlled. When connected to the
tertiary windings of a large transformer, they become cost-effective. Voltage drop
in high series reactance between HV and tertiary windings must be accounted for
when deciding the voltage rating of tertiary connected shunt reactors. Shunt
reactors can be of core-less (air-core) or gapped-core (magnetic circuit with nonmagnetic gaps) design. The flux density in the air-core reactor has to be smaller as
the flux path is not well constrained. Eddy losses in the winding and stray losses in
the structural conducting parts are higher in this type of reactor. In contrast, the
gapped-core reactor is more compact due to higher permissible flux density. The
gap length can be suitably designed to get a desired reactance value. Shunt
reactors are usually designed to have a constant impedance characteristics up to
1.5 times the rated voltage to minimize the harmonic current generation under
over-voltage conditions.
o. Series Reactors: These reactors are connected in series with generators, feeders
and transmission lines for limiting fault currents under short circuits. Series
reactors should have linear magnetic characteristics under fault conditions. They
are designed to withstand mechanical and thermal effects of short circuits. Series
reactors used in transmission lines have a fully insulated winding since both its
ends should be able to withstand the lightning impulse voltages. The value of
series reactance has to be judiciously selected because a higher value reduces the
power transfer capability of the line. The smoothing reactors used in HVDC

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

11

transmission system, connected between the converter and DC line, smoothen the
DC voltage ripple.

1.3 Principles and Equivalent Circuit of a Transformer
1.3.1 Ideal transformer
A transformer works on the principle of electromagnetic induction, according to
which a voltage is induced in a coil if it links a changing flux. Figure 1.2 shows a
single-phase transformer consisting of two windings, wound on a magnetic core
and linked by a mutual flux
Transformer is in no-load condition with primary
connected to a source of sinusoidal voltage of frequency f Hz. Primary winding
draws a small excitation current, i0 (instantaneous value), from the source to set up
the mutual flux in the core. All the flux is assumed to be contained in the core
(no leakage). The windings 1 and 2 have N1 and N2 turns respectively. The
instantaneous value of induced electromotive force in the winding 1 due to the
mutual flux is
(1.1)
Equation 1.1 is as per the circuit viewpoint; there is flux viewpoint also [1], in
which induced voltage (counter electromotive force) is represented as
The elaborate explanation for both the viewpoints is given in
[2]. If the winding is assumed to have zero winding resistance,
v1=e1

Figure 1.2 Transformer in no-load condition

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

(1.2)

12

Chapter 1

Since v1 (instantaneous value of the applied voltage) is sinusoidally varying, the
flux must also be sinusoidal in nature varying with frequency f. Let
(1.3)
where
is the peak value of mutual flux
substituting the value of in equation 1.1, we get

After

(1.4)
The r.m.s. value of the induced voltage, E1, is obtained by dividing the peak value
in equation 1.4 by
(1.5)
Equation 1.5 is known as emf equation of a transformer. For a given number of
turns and frequency, the flux (and flux density) in a core is entirely determined by
the applied voltage.
The voltage induced in winding 2 due to the mutual flux is given by
(1.6)
The ratio of two induced voltages can be derived from equations 1.1 and 1.6 as
e1/e2=N1/N2=a

(1.7)

where a is known as ratio of transformation. Similarly, r.m.s. value of the induced
voltage in winding 2 is
(1.8)
The exciting current (i0) is only of magnetizing nature (im) if B-H curve of core
material is assumed without hysteresis and if eddy current losses are neglected.
The magnetizing current (im) is in phase with the mutual flux in the absence of
hysteresis. Also, linear magnetic (B-H) characteristics are assumed.
Now, if the secondary winding in figure 1.2 is loaded, secondary current is set
up as per Lenz’s law such that the secondary magnetomotive force (mmf), i2N2,
opposes the mutual flux
tending to reduce it. In an ideal transformer e1=v1,
because for a constant value of the applied voltage, induced voltage and
corresponding mutual flux must remain constant. This can happen only if the
primary draws more current (i1’) for neutralizing the demagnetizing effect of
secondary ampere-turns. In r.m.s. notations,
(1.9)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

13

Thus, the total primary current is a vector sum of the no-load current (i.e.,
magnetizing component, Im, since core losses are neglected) and the load current
(I1’),
(1.10)
For an infinite permeability magnetic material, magnetizing current is zero.
Equation 1.9 then becomes
I1N1=I2N2

(1.11)

Thus, for an ideal transformer when its no-load current is neglected, primary
ampere-turns are equal to secondary ampere-turns. The same result can also be
arrived at by applying Ampere’s law, which states that the magnetomotive force
around a closed path is given by
(1.12)
where i is the current enclosed by the line integral of the magnetic field intensity H
around the closed path of flux
(1.13)
If the relative permeability of the magnetic path is assumed as infinite, the integral
of magnetic field intensity around the closed path is zero. Hence, in the r.m.s.
notations,
I1N1-I2N2=0

(1.14)

which is the same result as in equation 1.11.
Thus, for an ideal transformer (zero winding resistance, no leakage flux, linear
B-H curve with an infinite permeability, no core losses), it can be summarized as,
(1.15)
and
V1I1=V2I2

(1.16)

Schematic representation of the transformer in figure 1.2 is shown in figure 1.3.
The polarities of voltages depend upon the directions in which the primary and
secondary windings are wound. It is common practice to put a dot at the end of the
windings such that the dotted ends of the windings are positive at the same time,
meaning that the voltage drops from the dotted to unmarked terminals are in
phase. Also, currents flowing from the dotted to unmarked terminals in the
windings produce an mmf acting in the same direction in the magnetic circuit

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

14

Chapter 1

Figure 1.3 Schematic representation of transformer

If the secondary winding in figure 1.2 is loaded with an impedance Z2,
Z2=V2/I2

(1.17)

Substituting from equation 1.15 for V2 and I2,
(1.18)
Hence, the impedance as referred to the primary winding 1 is
(1.19)
Similarly, any impedance Z1 in the primary circuit can be referred to the secondary
side 2 as
(1.20)
It can be summarized from equations 1.15, 1.16, 1.19 and 1.20 that for an ideal
transformer, voltages are transformed in ratio of turns, currents in inverse ratio of
turns and impedances in square of ratio of turns, whereas the volt-amperes and
power remain unchanged.
The ideal transformer transforms direct voltage, i.e., DC voltages on primary
and secondary sides are related by turns ratio. This is not a surprising result
because for the ideal transformer, we have assumed infinite core material
permeability with linear (non-saturating) characteristics permitting core flux to
rise without limit under a DC voltage application. When a DC voltage (Vd1) is
applied to the primary winding with the secondary winding open-circuited,
(1.21)
Thus,
is constant (flux permitted to rise with time without any limit) and
is equal to (Vd1/N1). Voltage at the secondary of the ideal transformer is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

15

Figure 1.4 Practical transformer

(1.22)
However, for a practical transformer, during the steady-state condition, current
has a value of Vd1/R1, and the magnetic circuit is driven into saturation reducing
eventually the value of induced voltages E1 and E2 to zero (in saturation there is
hardly any change in the flux even though the current may still be increasing till
the steady state condition is reached). The current value, Vd1/R1, is quite high,
resulting in damage to the transformer.
1.3.2 Practical transformer
Analysis presented for the ideal transformer is merely to explain the fundamentals
of transformer action; such a transformer never exists and the equivalent circuit of
a real transformer shown in figure 1.4 is now developed.
Whenever a magnetic material undergoes a cyclic magnetization, two types of
losses, eddy and hysteresis losses, occur in it. These losses are always present in
transformers as the flux in their ferromagnetic core is of alternating nature. A
detailed explanation of these losses is given in Chapter 2.
The hysteresis loss and eddy loss are minimized by use of a better grade of core
material and thinner laminations, respectively. The total no-load current, I0,
consists of magnetizing component (Im) responsible for producing the mutual flux
and core loss component (Ic) accounting for active power drawn from the
source to supply eddy and hysteresis losses. The core loss component is in phase
with the induced voltage and leads the magnetizing component by 90°. With the
secondary winding open-circuited, the transformer behaves as a highly inductive
circuit due to magnetic core, and hence the no-load current lags the applied
voltage by an angle slightly less than 90° (Im is usually much greater than Ic). In the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

16

Chapter 1

equivalent circuit shown in figure 1.5, the magnetizing component is represented
by the inductive reactance Xm, whereas the loss component is accounted by the
resistance Rc.
Let R1 and R2 be the resistances of windings 1 and 2, respectively. In a practical
transformer, some part of the flux linking primary winding does not link the
secondary. This flux component is proportional to the primary current and is
responsible for a voltage drop which is accounted by an inductive reactance XL1
(leakage reactance) put in series with the primary winding of the ideal
transformer. Similarly, the leakage reactance XL2 is added in series with the
secondary winding to account for the voltage drop due to flux linking only the
secondary winding. One can omit the ideal transformer from the equivalent
circuit, if all the quantities are either referred to the primary or secondary side of
the transformer. For example, in equivalent circuit of figure 1.5 (b), all quantities
are referred to the primary side, where
(1.23)
(1.24)
This equivalent circuit is a passive lumped-T representation, valid generally for
sinusoidal steady-state analysis at power frequencies. For higher frequencies,
capacitive effects must be considered, as discussed in Chapter 7. For any transient
analysis, all the reactances in the equivalent circuit should be replaced by the
corresponding equivalent inductances.

Figure 1.5 Equivalent circuit

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

17

While drawing a vector diagram, it must be remembered that all the quantities
in it must be of same frequency. Actually, the magnetization (B-H) curve of core
material is of non-linear nature, and it introduces higher order harmonics in the
magnetizing current for a sinusoidal applied voltage of fundamental frequency. In
the vector diagram, however, a linear B-H curve is assumed neglecting harmonics.
The aspects related to the core magnetization and losses are dealt in Chapter 2. For
figure 1.5 (a), the following equations can be written:
V1=E1+(R1+jXLl)I1

(1.25)

V2=E2-(R2+jXL2)I2

(1.26)

Vector diagrams for primary and secondary voltages/currents are shown in figure
1.6. The output terminal voltage V2 is taken as a reference vector along x-axis. The
load power factor angle is denoted by θ2. The induced voltages are in phase and
lead the mutual flux
(r.m.s. value of ) by 90° in line with equations 1.1 and
1.6. The magnetizing component (Im) of no-load current (I0) is in phase with
whereas the loss component Ic leads
by 90° and is in phase with the induced
voltage E1. The core loss is given as
Pc=IcE1

(1.27)

or
(1.28)
The mutual reactance Xm is
(1.29)

Figure 1.6 Vector diagrams

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

18

Chapter 1

The magnitude of secondary current referred to the primary
is same as that of
secondary current (I2), since the turns of primary and secondary windings are
assumed equal. There is some phase shift between the terminal voltages V1 and V2
due to the voltage drops in the leakage impedances. The voltage drops in the
resistances and leakage reactances have been exaggerated in the vector diagram.
The voltage across a winding resistance is usually around 0.5% of the terminal
voltage for large power transformers, whereas the voltage drop in leakage
impedance depends on the impedance value of the transformer. For small
distribution transformers (e.g., 5 MVA), the value of impedance is around 4 to 7%
and for power transformers it can be anywhere in the range of 8 to 20% depending
upon the regulation and system protection requirements. The lower the percentage
impedance, the lower the voltage drop. However, the required ratings of circuit
breakers will be higher.
1.3.3 Mutual and leakage inductances
The leakage flux
shown in figure 1.4 is produced by the current i1 in winding 1,
which only links winding 1. Similarly, the leakage flux
is produced by the
current i2 in winding 2, which only links winding 2. The primary leakage
inductance is
(1.30)
Differential reluctance offered to the path of leakage flux is
(1.31)
Equations 1.30 and 1.31 give
(1.32)
Similarly, the leakage inductance of secondary winding is
(1.33)
Let us derive the expression for mutual inductance M. Using equation 1.6,
(1.34)
where,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

19
(1.35)

M21 represents flux linkages in the secondary winding due to magnetizing current
(im) in the primary winding divided by the current im. Reluctance offered to the
path of mutual flux
is denoted by
Similarly,
(1.36)
Thus, the mutual inductance M is given by
(1.37)
Let
flux

represent the total reluctance of parallel paths of two fluxes, viz. leakage
of winding 1 and mutual flux
Also let
(1.38)

The self inductance L1 of winding 1 ,when i2=0, is
(1.39)
Similarly let
(1.40)
and we get
(1.41)
Hence,
(1.42)
Coefficient

is a measure of coupling between the two windings. From

definitions of k1 and k2 (e.g.,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

), it is clear that

20

Chapter 1

0≤k1≤1 and 0≤k2≤1, giving 0≤k≤1. For k=1, windings are said to have perfect
coupling with no leakage flux, which is possible only for the ideal transformer.

1.3.4 Simplified equivalent circuit
Since the no-load current and voltage drop in the leakage impedance are usually
small, it is often permissible to simplify the equivalent circuit of figure 1.5 (b) by
doing some approximations. Terminal voltages (V1, V2) are not appreciably
different than the corresponding induced voltages, and hence a little error is
caused if the no-load current is made to correspond to the terminal voltage instead
of the induced voltage. For example, if the excitation branch (consisting of Xm in
parallel Rc) is shifted to the input terminals (excited by V1), the approximate
equivalent circuit will be as shown in figure 1.7 (a). If we totally neglect the noload excitation current, since it is much less as compared to the full load current,
the circuit can be further simplified as shown in figure 1.7 (b). This simplified
circuit, in which a transformer is represented by the series impedance of Zeq1, is
considered to be sufficiently accurate for modeling purpose in power system
studies. Since Req1 is much smaller than Xeq1, a transformer can be represented just
as a series reactance in most cases.

1.4 Representation of Transformer in Power System
As seen in the previous section, ohmic values of resistance and leakage reactance
of a transformer depend upon whether they are referred on the LV side or HV side.
A great advantage is realized by expressing voltage, current, impedance and voltamperes in per-unit or percentage of base values of these quantities. The per-unit
quantities, once expressed on a particular base, are same when referred to either
side of the transformer. Thus, the value of per-unit impedance remains same on
either side obviating the need for any calculations by using equations 1.19 and
1.20. This approach is very handy in power system calculations, where a large
number of transformers, each having a number of windings, are present.

Figure 1.7 Simplified equivalent circuit

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

21

For a system, the per-unit values are derived by choosing a set of base values for
various quantities. Although the base values can be chosen arbitrarily, it is
preferable to use the rated quantities of a device as the base values. The per-unit
quantity (p.u.) is related to the base quantity by the following relationship:
(1.43)
The actual and base values must be expressed in the same unit. Usually, base
values of voltage and volt-amperes are chosen first, from which other base
quantities are determined. The basic values of voltages on the LV side and HV side
are denoted by VbL and VbH respectively. The corresponding values of base currents
for the LV side and HV side are IbL and IbH respectively. If rated voltage of LV
winding is taken as a base voltage (VbL) for the LV side,

(1.44)
Hence, the per-unit values of rated quantities are equal to unity when rated
quantities are chosen as the base quantities. The per-unit quantities are ratios and
dimensionless, which are to be multiplied by 100 to get the percentage (%) values.
The value of base impedance on the LV side is,
(1.45)
where (VA)b denotes base volt-amperes. Similarly for the HV side,
(1.46)
For the simplified equivalent circuit of figure 1.7, the equivalent total resistance
referred to the primary (LV) side can be expressed in per-unit notation as,
(1.47)
If Req2 is the total equivalent resistance of the windings referred to the secondary
(HV) winding, it follows from the equations 1.24 and 1.47 that

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

22

Chapter 1

(1.48)
Similarly, it can easily be verified that the per-unit values of impedance calculated
on the LV and HV sides are equal.
The per-unit impedance can be expressed as

(1.49)
Thus, (Zeq)pu denotes the per-unit value of leakage impedance voltage drop on the
LV (or HV) side. For example, if 1000/100 V transformer has (Zeq)pu of 0.1, the
voltage drop across the equivalent leakage impedance referred to the LV side is
0.1 times 100 volts, i.e., 10 volts; the corresponding voltage drop on the HV side is
100 volts (=0.1×1000). Similarly,

(1.50)
Thus, the per-unit value of resistance (Req)pu is a ratio of ohmic loss at the rated
current to the rated volt-amperes. For example, (Req)pu of 0.02 for 50 kVA, 1000/
100 V transformer means that the total ohmic loss at the rated current is 0.02 times
(2% of) 50 kVA, i.e., 1000 watts.
Another advantage of using per-unit system is that the impedances of
transformers of the same type (irrespective of their ratings) lie usually within a
small known range of per-unit values although the ohmic values may be widely
different.
For large power transformers, base voltage is usually expressed in kV and
base volt-amperes in MVA. Hence, the base impedance on either side can be
calculated as
(1.51)
For a three-phase transformer, the total three-phase MVA and line-to-line kV are
taken as the base values. It can be shown that when ohmic value of impedance is
transferred from one side to other, the multiplying factor is the ratio of squares of
line-to-line voltages of both sides irrespective of whether transformer connection
is star-star or star-delta [3].

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

23

Figure 1.8 Open circuit test

1.5 Open Circuit and Short Circuit Tests
Parameters of the equivalent circuit can be determined by open circuit (no-load)
and short circuit (load) tests. Open circuit test determines the parameters of shunt
branch of the equivalent circuit of figure 1.5. The circuit diagram for conducting
the test is shown in figure 1.8. The rated voltage is applied to one winding and
other winding is kept open (usually LV winding is supplied, while HV is kept open
for ease of testing and availability of supply). Since the no-load current is a very
small percentage of the full load current, which can be in the range of 0.2 to 2%
(for large power transformers, e.g., above 300 MVA, no-load current can be as
small as about 0.2%), the voltage drop in LV resistance and leakage reactance is
negligible as compared to the rated voltage (
in figure 1.5). The input
power measured by a wattmeter consists of the core loss and primary winding
ohmic loss. If the no-load current is 1% of full load current, ohmic loss in primary
winding resistance is just 0.01% of the load loss at rated current; the value of
winding loss is negligible as compared to the core losses. Hence, the entire
wattmeter reading can be taken as the total core loss. The equivalent circuit of
figure 1.5 (b) gets simplified to that shown in figure 1.8 (b).
The no-load (core loss) Pc measured by the wattmeter is expressed as
Pc=V1I0 cosθ0

(1.52)

From the measured values of Pc, V1 and I0, the value of no-load power factor can be
calculated from equation 1.52 as
(1.53)
With reference to the vector diagram of figure 1.6, the magnetizing component
(Im) and the core loss component (Ic) of the no-load current (I0) are
Ic=I0 cosθ0

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

(1.54)

24

Chapter 1

Figure 1.9 Short circuit test (with LV terminals short-circuited)

Im=I0 sinθ0

(1.55)

The shunt branch parameters of the equivalent circuit can be estimated as

(1.56)

(1.57)
These values are with reference to the LV side, since the measuring instruments are
placed on the LV side. If required, they can be referred to the HV side by using the
operator a2. The value of magnetizing reactance is very high as compared to the
leakage reactance. For a no-load current of 0.2% (and with the assumption
that
), the value of Xm is 500 per-unit.
A short circuit test is done to measure the load loss and leakage impedance of
a transformer. In this test, usually the LV winding is short-circuited and voltage
is applied to the HV winding in order to circulate the rated currents in both the
windings; the voltage required to be applied is called as the impedance voltage

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

25

of the transformer. For a transformer having 10% leakage impedance, voltage
required to circulate the rated current is 10% of the rated voltage. The circuit
diagram for short circuit test is shown in figure 1.9 (a), in which LV winding
(secondary winding 2) is short-circuited. For an applied voltage of 10%,
assuming for the equivalent circuit of figure 1.5 (b) that the primary and referred
secondary leakage impedances are equal, 5% of voltage appears across the shunt
excitation branch. With a no-load current of 2% at rated voltage, the current in
the shunt branch for a 5% voltage is just 0.1% of rated current (assuming linear
B-H curve). Hence, the shunt branch can be neglected giving the simplified
circuit of figure 1.9 (b) for the short circuit test. Since the core loss varies
approximately in the square proportion of the applied voltage, with 5% voltage
across the shunt excitation branch, it is just 0.25% of the core loss at the rated
voltage. Hence, almost the entire loss measured by the wattmeter is the load loss
of the transformer.
Equivalent circuit parameters
and
can now be determined from the measured quantities of
power (PL), voltage (VSC) and current (ISC) as

(1.58)

(1.59)

(1.60)
Req1 is the equivalent AC resistance referred to the primary (HV) winding and
accounts for the losses in DC resistance of windings, eddy losses in windings and
stray losses in structural parts. It is not practically possible to apportion parts of
stray losses to the two windings. Hence, if the resistance parameter is required for
each winding, it is usually assumed that
Similarly it is
assumed that

although it is strictly not true. Since the value of % R is

much smaller than % Z, practically percentage reactance (% X) is taken to be the
same as percentage impedance (% Z). This approximation may not be true for
very small distribution transformers.

1.6 Voltage Regulation and Efficiency
Since many electrical equipments and appliances operate most effectively at their
rated voltage, it is necessary that the output voltage of a transformer is within

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

26

Chapter 1

narrow limits when the magnitude and power factor of loads vary. Voltage
regulation is an important performance parameter of a transformer that determines
the quality of electricity supplied to consumers. The voltage regulation for a
specific load is defined as a change in magnitude of secondary voltage after
removal of the load (primary voltage being held constant) expressed as a fraction
of the secondary voltage corresponding to the no-load condition.

(1.61)
where V2 is the secondary terminal voltage at a specific load and V2oc is the
secondary terminal voltage when the load is removed. For the approximate
equivalent circuit of a transformer (figure 1.7 (b)), if all the quantities are referred
to the secondary side, the voltage regulation for a lagging power factor load is
given as [4]

(1.62)

where Req2 and Xeq2 are the equivalent resistance and leakage reactance of the
transformer referred to the secondary side respectively. The secondary load
current (I2) lags behind the secondary terminal voltage (V2) by an angle θ2. Under
the rated load conditions, with the rated values taken as base quantities,
(1.63)
where

represents the per-unit resistance drop and

represents the per-unit leakage reactance drop. For a leading power factor load (I2
leads V2 by an angle θ2),
(1.64)
The square term is usually small and may be neglected, simplifying equations
1.63 and 1.64 as
(1.65)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

27

The efficiency of a transformer, like any other device, is defined as the ratio of
useful output power to input power.
(1.66)
The percentage efficiency of a transformer is in the range of 95 to 99%. For large
power transformers with low loss designs, the efficiency can be as high as 99.7%.
There is a possibility of error if the efficiency is determined from the measured
values of output and input powers, as the wattmeter readings may have an error of
about 1%. Hence, it is a more accurate approach if the efficiency is determined
using the measured values of losses by the open circuit and short circuit tests. The
efficiency is then given as
(1.67)

(1.68)
Although the load power factor has some effect on the mutual flux and hence
the core loss, the effect is insignificant, allowing us to assume that the core loss is
constant at all the load conditions. Hence, for the assumed constant values of Pc
and V2 (secondary terminal load voltage also varies with load, but the variation is
too small to be accounted in efficiency calculations), the condition for maximum
efficiency, at a given load power factor, can be derived by differentiating the
expression for η with respect to I2 and equating it to zero:

(1.69)

Solving it further, we get
(1.70)
Thus, the maximum efficiency occurs at a load at which variable load loss equals
the constant core (no-load) loss. Further,
(1.71)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

28

Chapter 1

where I2FL is the full-load (rated) current and
is the load loss at the rated
load conditions. Therefore, the per-unit load at which the maximum efficiency
occurs is
(1.72)
The value of maximum efficiency can be found out by substituting the value of I2
from equation 1.72 in equation 1.68. Similarly, it can easily be shown that the
maximum efficiency, for a given load, occurs at unity power factor (cosθ=1).
The rating of transformers is expressed in volt-amperes and not in watts
because heating (temperature) determines the life of the transformers. Hence, the
rated output is limited by the losses, which depend on the voltage (no-load loss)
and the current (load loss), and are almost unaffected by the load power factor.
The amount of heat depends on the r.m.s. values of current and voltage and not on
the power factor. Hence, the power delivered through a transformer may not be a
unique value. The rating of a transformer is therefore not expressed in power
rating (watts) but by the one which indicates the apparent power (volt-amperes)
that it can deliver.
Example 1.1
A single-phase transformer is designed to operate at 220/110 V, 60 Hz. What will
be effect on the transformer performance if frequency reduces by 5% to 57 Hz and
voltage increases by 5% to 231 volts?
Solution:
The emf equation of a transformer is given by

Now
where Bmp=peak value of flux density in core (wb/m2)
Ac=core cross-sectional area in m2
Hence, for a given number of turns (N1) and core area (Ac),

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

29

Thus, with the reduced frequency and higher applied voltage, the flux density in
the core increases resulting in higher no-load current, core losses and noise. This
example shows that a transformer designer has to select the operating peak flux
density in the core depending on the overfluxing conditions (simultaneous overvoltage and under-frequency) specified by the user.
Example 1.2
Tests on 31.5 MVA, 132/33 kV star/delta 3-phase transformer gave following
results (loss values given are for three phases):
- Open circuit test: 33 kV, 5.5 A, 21 kW
- Short circuit test: 13.2 kV, 137.8 A, 100 kW
Calculate: a) equivalent circuit parameters referred to LV side
b) efficiency at full load and half of full load with unity power factor
c) regulation at full load with 0.8 power factor lagging
Solution:
a) Unless otherwise stated, the specified values of voltages should be taken as
line-to-line values. The equivalent circuit parameters are on per-phase basis, and
hence all the quantities in 3-phase balanced system are converted into the perphase values.
The open circuit test is performed on the LV side with the application of rated
voltage of 33 kV. For a delta connected LV winding, line and phase voltages are
the same; per-phase LV current is line current divided by
Hence we get,
Per-phase no-load excitation current =
Per-phase core loss=
Core-loss component=
Magnetizing component=
Values of core-loss resistance and magnetizing reactance referred to the LV side
are

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

30

Chapter 1

Base impedance on the LV side=
Thus, the per-unit value of Xm is
Now the short circuit test is performed on the HV side (applied voltage of 13.2 kV
is a fraction of rated HV voltage of 132 kV).
Per-phase applied voltage to the star-connected HV winding =
For star connection, phase current is equal to line current (=137.8 A).
Now, ohmic value of the leakage impedance and resistance referred to the HV side
can be calculated as

Per phase value of load-loss=

Now, the equivalent circuit quantities calculated on the HV side can be referred to
the LV side using the transformation ratio a,

where VpL and VpH are phase voltages of LV and HV windings respectively.

Similarly,

In per-unit quantities,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

31

We could have directly found the value of (ReqL)pu by using line-to-line and 3phase quantities using equation 1.50 as

Similarly we can directly infer the value of (XeqL)pu, which is almost equal to
(ZeqL)pu, from the short circuit test results because it equals the fraction of rated
voltage applied to circulate the rated current,

b) Efficiency can be worked out either by using per-phase or 3-phase quantities.
The percentage efficiency at full load and unity power factor (cosθ=1) can be
calculated by using equation 1.68 as

and at half the full load,

The maximum efficiency occurs at a load of
equation 1.72.

as per

c) Regulation at full load and 0.8 power factor lagging is calculated from equation
1.63 as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

32

Chapter 1

Example 1.3
A 500 kVA single-phase transformer is designed to have a resistance of 1% with its
maximum efficiency occurring at 250 kVA load. Find efficiency of the transformer
when it is supplying full load at 0.8 power factor lagging.
Solution:
The percentage resistance is given as

Now from equation 1.72, for the same terminal voltage,

Total loss at full load=1250+5000=6250 W
Efficiency at full load and 0.8 power factor=

Although the efficiency of a transformer is given by the ratio of output power to
input power, there are some specific applications of transformer in which its
performance cannot be judged only by this efficiency. Distribution transformers,
for example, supply a load which varies over a wide range throughout the day. For
such transformers, the parameter all-day efficiency is of more relevance and is
defined as
(1.73)
The output and losses are computed for a period of 24 hours using the load cycle.
No-load losses are constant (independent of load); hence it is important to design
distribution transformers with a lower value of no-load losses so that a higher
value of all day energy efficiency is achieved.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Transformer Fundamentals

33

1.7 Parallel Operation of Transformers
For supplying a load in excess of the rating of an existing transformer, two or more
transformers may be connected in parallel with the existing transformer. It is
usually economical to install another transformer in parallel instead of replacing
the existing transformer by a single larger unit. The cost of a spare unit in the case
of two parallel transformers (of equal rating) is also lower than that of a single
large transformer. In addition, it is preferable to have a parallel transformer for the
reason of reliability. With this, at least half the load can be supplied with one
transformer out of service. For parallel connection of transformers, primary
windings of the transformers are connected to source bus-bars and secondary
windings are connected to the load bus-bars. There are various conditions that
must be fulfilled for the successful parallel operation of transformers. These are as
follows:
1. The line voltage ratios of the transformers must be equal (on each tap): If the
transformers connected in parallel have slightly different voltage ratios, then due
to the inequality of induced emfs in the secondary windings, a circulating current
will flow in the loop formed by the secondary windings under the no-load
condition, which may be much greater than the normal no-load current. The
current will be quite high as the leakage impedance is low. When the secondary
windings are loaded, this circulating current will tend to produce unequal loading
on the two transformers, and it may not be possible to take the full load from this
group of two parallel transformers (one of the transformers may get overloaded).
2. The transformers should have equal per-unit leakage impedances and the same
ratio of equivalent leakage reactance to the equivalent resistance (X/R): If the
ratings of both the transformers are equal, their per-unit leakage impedances
should be equal in order to have equal loading of both the transformers. If the
ratings are unequal, their per-unit leakage impedances based on their own ratings
should be equal so that the currents carried by them will be proportional to their
ratings. In other words, for unequal ratings, the numerical (ohmic) values of their
impedances should be in inverse proportion to their ratings to have current in them
in line with their ratings.
A difference in the ratio of the reactance value to resistance value of the perunit impedance results in a different phase angle of the currents carried by the two
paralleled transformers; one transformer will be working with a higher power
factor and the other with a lower power factor than that of the combined output.
Hence, the real power will not be proportionally shared by the transformers.
3. The transformers should have the same polarity: The transformers should be
properly connected with regard to their polarity. If they are connected with
incorrect polarities then the two emfs, induced in the secondary windings which
are in parallel, will act together in the local secondary circuit and produce a short
circuit.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

34

Chapter 1

The previous three conditions are applicable to both single-phase as well as threephase transformers. In addition to these three conditions, two more conditions are
essential for the parallel operation of three-phase transformers:
4. The transformers should have the same phase sequence: The phase sequence of
line voltages of both the transformers must be identical for parallel operation of
three-phase transformers. If the phase sequence is an incorrect, in every cycle each
pair of phases will get short-circuited.
5. The transformers should have the zero relative phase displacement between the
secondary line voltages: The transformer windings can be connected in a variety
of ways which produce different magnitudes and phase displacements of the
secondary voltage. All the transformer connections can be classified into distinct
vector groups. Each vector group notation consists of first an uppercase letter
denoting HV connection, a second lowercase letter denoting LV connection,
followed by a clock number representing LV winding’s phase displacement with
respect to HV winding (at 12 o’clock). There are four groups into which all
possible three-phase connections can be classified:
Group 1: Zero phase displacement (Yy0, Dd0, Dz0)
Group 2:180° phase displacement (Yy6, Dd6, Dz6)
Group 3: -30° phase displacement (Yd1, Dy1, Yz1)
Group 4: +30° phase displacement (Yd11, Dy11, Yz11)
In above notations, letters y (or Y), d (or D) and z represent star, delta and zigzag
connections respectively. In order to have zero relative phase displacement of
secondary side line voltages, the transformers belonging to the same group can be
paralleled. For example, two transformers with Yd1 and Dy1 connections can be
paralleled. The transformers of groups 1 and 2 can only be paralleled with
transformers of their own group. However, the transformers of groups 3 and 4 can
be paralleled by reversing the phase sequence of one of them. For example, a
transformer with Yd1 1 connection (group 4) can be paralleled with that having
Dy1 connection (group 3) by reversing the phase sequence of both primary and
secondary terminals of the Dy1 transformer.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

Say, M.G. The performance and design of alternating current machines, 2nd
edition, Sir Isaac Pitman and Sons, London, 1955.
Toro, V.D. Principles of electrical engineering, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall, New
Delhi, 1977.
Stevenson, W.D. Elements of power system analysis, 4th edition, McGrawHill, Tokyo, 1982, pp. 138–162.
MIT Press, Magnetic circuits and transformers, 14th edition, John Wiley and
Sons, New York, 1962, pp. 259–406.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

2
Magnetic Characteristics

The magnetic circuit is one of the most important active parts of a transformer. It
consists of laminated iron core and carries flux linked to windings. Energy is
transferred from one electrical circuit to another through the magnetic field
carried by the core. The iron core provides a low reluctance path to the magnetic
flux thereby reducing magnetizing current. Most of the flux is contained in the
core reducing stray losses in structural parts. Due to on-going research and
development efforts [1] by steel and transformer manufacturers, core materials
with improved characteristics are getting developed and applied with better core
building technologies. In the early days of transformer manufacturing, inferior
grades of laminated steel (as per today’s standards) were used with inherent
high losses and magnetizing volt-amperes. Later on it was found that the
addition of silicon content of about 4 to 5% improves the performance
characteristics significantly, due to a marked reduction in eddy losses (on
account of the increase in material resistivity) and increase in permeability.
Hysteresis loss is also lower due to a narrower hysteresis loop. The addition of
silicon also helps to reduce the aging effects. Although silicon makes the
material brittle, it is well within limits and does not pose problems during the
process of core building. Subsequently, the cold rolled manufacturing
technology in which the grains are oriented in the direction of rolling gave a new
direction to material development for many decades, and even today newer
materials are centered around the basic grain orientation process. Important
stages of core material development are: non-oriented, hot rolled grain oriented
(HRGO), cold rolled grain oriented (CRGO), high permeability cold rolled
grain oriented (Hi-B), laser scribed and mechanically scribed. Laminations with
lower thickness are manufactured and used to take advantage of lower eddy
losses. Currently the lowest thickness available is 0.23 mm, and the popular
thickness range is 0.23 mm to 0.35 mm for power transformers. Maximum
35
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

36

Chapter 2

thickness of lamination used in small transformers can be as high as 0.50 mm.
The lower the thickness of laminations, the higher core building time is required
since the number of laminations for a given core area increases. Inorganic
coating (generally glass film and phosphate layer) having thickness of 0.002 to
0.003 mm is provided on both the surfaces of laminations, which is sufficient to
withstand eddy voltages (of the order of a few volts).
Since the core is in the vicinity of high voltage windings, it is grounded to drain
out the statically induced voltages. If the core is sectionalized by ducts (of about 5
mm) for the cooling purpose, individual sections have to be grounded. Some users
prefer to ground the core outside tank through a separate bushing. All the internal
structural parts of a transformer (e.g., frames) are grounded. While designing the
grounding system, due care must be taken to avoid multiple grounding, which
otherwise results into circulating currents and subsequent failure of transformers.
The tank is grounded externally by a suitable arrangement. Frames, used for
clamping yokes and supporting windings, are generally grounded by connecting
them to the tank by means of a copper or aluminum strip. If the frame-to-tank
connection is done at two places, a closed loop formed may link appreciable stray
leakage flux. A large circulating current may get induced which can eventually
burn the connecting strips.

2.1 Construction
2.1.1 Types of core
A part of a core, which is surrounded by windings, is called a limb or leg.
Remaining part of the core, which is not surrounded by windings, but is essential
for completing the path of flux, is called as yoke. This type of construction
(termed as core type) is more common and has the following distinct advantages:
viz. construction is simpler, cooling is better and repair is easy. Shell-type
construction, in which a cross section of windings in the plane of core is
surrounded by limbs and yokes, is also used. It has the advantage that one can use
sandwich construction of LV and HV windings to get very low impedance, if
desired, which is not easily possible in the core-type construction. In this book,
most of the discussion is related to the core-type construction, and where required
reference to shell-type construction has been made.
The core construction mainly depends on technical specifications,
manufacturing limitations, and transport considerations. It is economical to have
all the windings of three phases in one core frame. A three-phase transformer is
cheaper (by about 20 to 25%) than three single-phase transformers connected in a
bank. But from the spare unit consideration, users find it more economical to buy
four single-phase transformers as compared to two three-phase transformers.
Also, if the three-phase rating is too large to be manufactured in transformer
works (weights and dimensions exceeding the manufacturing capability) and

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

37

transported, there is no option but to manufacture and supply single-phase units.
In figure 2.1, various types of core construction are shown.
In a single-phase three-limb core (figure 2.1 (a)), windings are placed around
the central limb, called as main limb. Flux in the main limb gets equally divided
between two yokes and it returns via end limbs. The yoke and end limb area
should be only 50% of the main limb area for the same operating flux density. This
type of construction can be alternately called as single-phase shell-type
transformer. Zero-sequence impedance is equal to positive-sequence impedance
for this construction (in a bank of single-phase transformers).
Sometimes in a single-phase transformer windings are split into two parts and
placed around two limbs as shown in figure 2.1 (b). This construction is
sometimes adopted for very large ratings. Magnitude of short-circuit forces are
lower because of the fact that ampere-turns/height are reduced. The area of limbs
and yokes is the same. Similar to the single-phase three-limb transformer, one can
have additional two end limbs and two end yokes as shown in figure 2.1 (c) to get
a single-phase four-limb transformer to reduce the height for the transport
purpose.

Figure 2.1 Various types of cores

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

38

Chapter 2

The most commonly used construction, for small and medium rating
transformers, is three-phase three-limb construction as shown in figure 2.1 (d).
For each phase, the limb flux returns through yokes and other two limbs (the same
amount of peak flux flows in limbs and yokes). In this construction, limbs and
yokes usually have the same area. Sometimes the yokes are provided with a 5%
additional area as compared to the limbs for reducing no-load losses. It is to be
noted that the increase in yoke area of 5% reduces flux density in the yoke by
5%, reduces watts/kg by more than 5% (due to non-linear characteristics) but
the yoke weight increases by 5%. Also, there may be additional loss due to
cross-fluxing since there may not be perfect matching between lamination steps
of limb and yoke at the joint. Hence, the reduction in losses may not be very
significant. The provision of extra yoke area may improve the performance
under over-excitation conditions. Eddy losses in structural parts, due to flux
leaking out of core due to its saturation under over-excitation condition, are
reduced to some extent [2,3]. The three-phase three-limb construction has
inherent three-phase asymmetry resulting in unequal no-load currents and
losses in three phases; the phenomenon is discussed in section 2.5.1. One can
get symmetrical core by connecting it in star or delta so that the windings of three
phases are electrically as well as physically displaced by 120 degrees. This
construction results into minimum core weight and tank size, but it is seldom used
because of complexities in manufacturing.
In large power transformers, in order to reduce the height for transportability,
three-phase five-limb construction depicted in figure 2.1 (e) is used. The magnetic
length represented by the end yoke and end limb has a higher reluctance as
compared to that represented by the main yoke. Hence, as the flux starts rising, it
first takes the path of low reluctance of the main yoke. Since the main yoke is not
large enough to carry all the flux from the limb, it saturates and forces the
remaining flux into the end limb. Since the spilling over of flux to the end limb
occurs near the flux peak and also due to the fact that the ratio of reluctances of
these two paths varies due to non-linear properties of the core, fluxes in both main
yoke and end yoke/end limb paths are non-sinusoidal even though the main limb
flux is varying sinusoidally [2,4]. Extra losses occur in the yokes and end limbs
due to the flux harmonics. In order to compensate these extra losses, it is a normal
practice to keep the main yoke area 60% and end yoke/end limb area 50% of the
main limb area. The zero-sequence impedance is much higher for the three-phase
five-limb core than the three-limb core due to low reluctance path (of yokes and
end limbs) available to the in-phase zero-sequence fluxes, and its value is close to
but less than the positive-sequence impedance value. This is true if the applied
voltage during the zero-sequence test is small enough so that the yokes and end
limbs are not saturated. The aspects related to zero-sequence impedances for
various types of core construction are elaborated in Chapter 3. Figure 2.1 (f)
shows a typical 3-phase shell-type construction.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

39

Figure 2.2 Overlapping at joints

2.1.2 Analysis of overlapping joints and building factor
While building a core, the laminations are placed in such a way that the gaps
between the laminations at the joint of limb and yoke are overlapped by the
laminations in the next layer. This is done so that there is no continuous gap at the
joint when the laminations are stacked one above the other (figure 2.2). The
overlap distance is kept around 15 to 20 mm. There are two types of joints most
widely used in transformers: non-mitred and mitred joints (figure 2.3). Nonmitred joints, in which the overlap angle is 90°, are quite simple from the
manufacturing point of view, but the loss in the corner joints is more since the flux
in the joint region is not along the direction of grain orientation. Hence, the nonmitred joints are used for smaller rating transformers. These joints were
commonly adopted in earlier days when non-oriented material was used.
In case of mitred joints the angle of overlap (α) is of the order of 30° to 60°, the
most commonly used angle is 45°. The flux crosses from limb to yoke along the
grain orientation in mitred joints minimizing losses in them. For airgaps of equal
length, the excitation requirement of cores with mitred joints is sin α times that
with non-mitred joints [5].

Figure 2.3 Commonly used joints

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

40

Chapter 2

Better grades of core material (Hi-B, scribed, etc.) having specific loss (watts/
kg) 15 to 20% lower than conventional CRGO material (termed hereafter as CGO
grade, e.g., M4) are regularly used. However, it has been observed that the use of
these better materials may not give the expected loss reduction if a proper value of
building factor is not used in loss calculations. It is defined as
(2.1)
The building factor generally increases as grade of the material improves from
CGO to Hi-B to scribed (domain refined). This is a logical fact because at the
corner joints the flux is not along the grain orientation, and the increase in watts/
kg due to deviation from direction of grain orientation is higher for a better grade
material. The factor is also a function of operating flux density; it deteriorates
more for better grade materials with the increase in operating flux density. Hence,
cores built with better grade material may not give the expected benefit in line
with Epstein measurements done on individual lamination. Therefore, appropriate
building factors should be taken for better grade materials using experimental/test
data.
Single-phase two-limb transformers give significantly better performances
than three-phase cores. For a single-phase two-limb core, building factor is as low
as 1.0 for the domain refined grade (laser or mechanically scribed material) and
slightly lower than 1.0 for CGO grade [6]. The reason for such a lower value of
losses is attributed to lightly loaded corners and spatial redistribution of flux in
limbs and yokes across the width of laminations. Needless to say, the higher the
proportion of corner weight in the total core weight, the higher are the losses. Also
the loss contribution due to the corner weight is higher in case of 90° joints as
compared to 45° joints since there is over-crowding of flux at the inner edge and
flux is not along the grain orientation while passing from limb to yoke in the
former case. Smaller the overlapping length better is the core performance; but the
improvement may not be noticeable. It is also reported in [6,7] that the gap at the
core joint has significant impact on the no-load loss and current. As compared to 0
mm gap, the increase in loss is 1 to 2% for 1.5 mm gap, 3 to 4% for 2.0 mm gap
and 8 to 12% for 3 mm gap. These figures highlight the need for maintaining
minimum gap at the core joints.
Lesser the laminations per lay, lower is the core loss. The experience shows that
from 4 laminations per lay to 2 laminations per lay, there is an advantage in loss of
about 3 to 4%. There is further advantage of 2 to 3% in 1 lamination per lay. As the
number of laminations per lay reduces, the manufacturing time for core building
increases and hence most of the manufacturers have standardized the core
building with 2 laminations per lay.
A number of works have been reported in the literature, which have analyzed
various factors affecting core losses. A core model for three-phase three-limb
transformer using a lumped circuit model is reported in [8]. The length of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

41

equivalent air gap is varied as a function of the instantaneous value of the flux in
the laminations. The anisotropy is also taken into account in the model. An
analytical solution using 2-D finite difference method is described in [9] to
calculate spatial flux distribution and core losses. The method takes into account
magnetic anisotropy and non-linearity. The effect of overlap length and number of
laminations per lay on core losses has been analyzed in [10] for wound core
distribution transformers.
Joints of limbs and yokes contribute significantly to the core loss due to crossfluxing and crowding of flux lines in them. Hence, the higher the corner area and
weight, the higher is the core loss. The corner area in single-phase three-limb
cores, single-phase four-limb cores and three-phase five-limb cores is less due to
smaller core diameter at the corners, reducing the loss contribution due to the
corners. However, this reduction is more than compensated by increase in loss
because of higher overall weight (due to additional end limbs and yokes).
Building factor is usually in the range of 1.1 to 1.25 for three-phase three-limb
cores with mitred joints. Higher the ratio of window height to window width,
lower is the contribution of corners to the loss and hence the building factor is
lower.
Single-phase two-limb and single-phase three-limb cores have been shown
[11] to have fairly uniform flux distribution and low level of total harmonic
distortion as compared to single-phase four-limb and three-phase five-limb
cores.
Step-lap joint is used by many manufacturers due to its excellent performance
figures. It consists of a group of laminations (commonly 5 to 7) stacked with a
staggered joint as shown in figure 2.4. Its superior performance as compared to the
conventional mitred construction has been analyzed in [12,13]. It is shown [13]
that, for a operating flux density of 1.7 T, the flux density in the mitred joint in the
core sheet area shunting the air gap rises to 2.7 T (heavy saturation), while in the
gap the flux density is about 0.7 T. Contrary to this, in the step-lap joint of 6 steps,
the flux totally avoids the gap with flux density of just 0.04 T, and gets
redistributed almost equally in laminations of other five steps with a flux density
close to 2.0 T. This explains why the no-load performance figures (current, loss
and noise) show a marked improvement for the step-lap joints.

Figure 2.4 Step-lap and conventional joint

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

42

Chapter 2

Figure 2.5 Hysteresis loss

2.2 Hysteresis and Eddy Losses
Hysteresis and eddy current losses together constitute the no-load loss. As
discussed in Chapter 1, the loss due to no-load current flowing in the primary
winding is negligible. Also, at the rated flux density condition on no-load, since
most of the flux is confined to the core, negligible losses are produced in the
structural parts due to near absence of the stray flux. The hysteresis and eddy
losses arise due to successive reversal of magnetization in the iron core with
sinusoidal application of voltage at a particular frequency f (cycles/second).
Eddy current loss, occurring on account of eddy currents produced due to
induced voltages in laminations in response to an alternating flux, is proportional
to the square of thickness of laminations, square of frequency and square of
effective (r.m.s.) value of flux density.
Hysteresis loss is proportional to the area of hysteresis loop (figure 2.5(a)). Let
e, i0 and φm denote the induced voltage, no-load current and core flux respectively.
As per equation 1.1, voltage e leads the flux φm by 90°. Due to hysteresis
phenomenon, current i0 leads φm by a hysteresis angle (ß) as shown in figure 2.5
(b). Energy, either supplied to the magnetic circuit or returned back by the
magnetic circuit is given by
(2.2)
If we consider quadrant I of the hysteresis loop, the area OABCDO represents
the energy supplied. Both induced voltage and current are positive for path AB.
For path BD, the energy represented by the area BCD is returned back to the
source since the voltage and current are having opposite signs giving a negative

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

43

value of energy. Thus, for the quadrant I the area OABDO represents the energy
loss; the area under hysteresis loop ABDEFIA represents the total energy loss
termed as the hysteresis loss. This loss has a constant value per cycle meaning
thereby that it is directly proportional to frequency (the higher the frequency
(cycles/second), the higher is the loss). The non-sinusoidal current i0 can be
resolved into two sinusoidal components: im in-phase with φm and ih in phase with
e. The component ih represents the hysteresis loss.
The eddy loss (Pe) and hysteresis loss (Ph) are thus given by
(2.3)

(2.4)
where
t is thickness of individual lamination
k1 and k2 are constants which depend on material
Brms is the rated effective flux density corresponding to the actual r.m.s.
voltage on the sine wave basis
Bmp is the actual peak value of the flux density
n is the Steinmetz constant having a value of 1.6 to 2.0 for hot rolled
laminations and a value of more than 2.0 for cold rolled laminations due to use
of higher operating flux density in them.
In r.m.s. notations, when the hysteresis component (Ih) shown in figure 2.5 (b) is
added to the eddy current loss component, we get the total core loss current (Ic). In
practice, the equations 2.3 and 2.4 are not used by designers for calculation of noload loss. There are at least two approaches generally used; in one approach the
building factor for the entire core is derived based on the experimental/test data,
whereas in the second approach the effect of corner weight is separately
accounted by a factor based on the experimental/test data.
No load loss=Wt×Kb×w
or No load loss=(Wt-Wc)×w+Wc×w×Kc

(2.5)
(2.6)

where,
w is watts/kg for a particular operating peak flux density as given by lamination
supplier (Epstein core loss),
Kb is the building factor,
Wc denotes corner weight out of total weight of Wt, and
Kc is factor representing extra loss occurring at the corner joints (whose value is
higher for smaller core diameters).

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

44

Chapter 2

2.3 Excitation Characteristics
Excitation current can be calculated by one of the following two methods. In the
first method, magnetic circuit is divided into many sections, within each of which
the flux density can be assumed to be of constant value. The corresponding value
of magnetic field intensity (H) is obtained for the lamination material (from its
magnetization curve) and for the air gap at joints. The excitation current can then
be calculated as the total magnetomotive force required for all magnetic sections
(n) divided by number of turns (N) of the excited winding,
(2.7)
where l is length of each magnetic section.
It is not practically possible to calculate the no-load current by estimating
ampere-turns required in different parts of the core to establish a given flux
density. The calculation is mainly complicated by the corner joints. Hence,
designers prefer the second method, which uses empirical factors derived from
test results. Designers generally refer the VA/kg (volt-amperes required per kg of
material) versus induction (flux density) curve of the lamination material. This
VA/kg is multiplied by a factor (which is based on test results) representing
additional excitation required at the joints to get VA/kg of the built core. In that
case, the no-load line current for a three-phase transformer can be calculated as
(2.8)

Generally, manufacturers test transformers of various ratings with different
core materials at voltage levels below and above the rated voltage and derive their
own VA/kg versus induction curves.
As seen from figure 2.5 (b), excitation current of a transformer is rich in
harmonics due to non-linear magnetic characteristics. For CRGO material, the
usually observed range of various harmonics is as follows. For the fundamental
component of 1 per-unit, 3rd harmonic is 0.3 to 0.5 per-unit, 5th harmonic is 0.1 to
0.3 per-unit and 7th harmonic is about 0.04 to 0.1 per-unit. The harmonics higher
than the 7th harmonic are of insignificant magnitude. The effective value of total
no-load current is given as
(2.9)
In above equation, I1 is the effective (r.m.s.) value of the fundamental
component (50 or 60 Hz) whereas I3, I5 and I7 are the effective values of 3rd, 5th and
7th harmonics respectively. The effect of higher harmonics of diminishing

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

45

magnitude have a small influence on the effective value of resultant no-load
current (40% value of 3rd harmonic increases the resultant by only about 8%).
Since the no-load current itself is in the range of 0.2 to 2% of the full load current,
harmonics in no-load current do not appreciably increase the copper loss in
windings except during extreme levels of core saturation. The harmonic
components of current do not contribute to the core loss if the applied voltage is
sinusoidal.
If the current harmonic components are modified or constrained, flux density
in the core gets modified. For example, if the third harmonic current is suppressed
by isolating the neutral, the flux density will be flat-topped for a sinusoidal current
as shown in figure 2.6 (hysteresis is neglected for simplicity). For this case, the
flux can be expressed as
(2.10)
where
etc. represent the peak values of fundamental and harmonic
components. The induced voltage per turn is

(2.11)

The induced voltage as seen in figure 2.6 is peaky in nature with pronounced third
harmonic component (only the third harmonic component is shown for clarity).
Thus, even a small deviation of flux from the sinusoidal nature introduces
appreciable harmonic components in voltages (15% third harmonic component in
flux results into 45% of third harmonic component in the voltage). This results in
increase of eddy losses but hysteresis loss reduces as the maximum value of flux
density is reduced. The net effect on the total core loss will depend on the relative
changes in eddy and hysteresis losses.

Figure 2.6 Waveforms of flux and voltage for sinusoidal magnetizing current

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

46

Chapter 2

2.4 Over-Excitation Performance
The choice of operating flux density of a core has a very significant impact on the
overall size, material cost and performance of a transformer. For the currently
available various grades of CRGO material, although losses and magnetizing voltamperes are lower for better grades, viz. Hi-B material (M0H, M1H, M2H), laser
scribed, mechanical scribed, etc., as compared to CGO material (M2, M3, M4,
M5, M6, etc.), the saturation flux density has remained same (about 2.0 T). The
peak operating flux density (Bmp) gets limited by the over-excitation conditions
specified by users. The slope of B-H curve of CRGO material significantly
worsens after about 1.9 T (for a small increase in flux density, relatively much
higher magnetizing current is drawn). Hence, the point corresponding to 1.9 T can
be termed as knee-point of the B-H curve. It has been seen in example 1.1 that the
simultaneous over-voltage and under-frequency conditions increase the flux
density in the core. Hence, for an over-excitation condition (over-voltage and
under-frequency) of a%, general guideline can be to use operating peak flux
density of [1.9/(1+α/100)]. For the 10% continuous over-excitation specification,
Bmp of 1.73 T [=1.9/(1+0.1)] can be the upper limit. For a power system, in which
a voltage profile is well maintained, a continuous over-excitation condition of 5%
is specified. In this case, Bmp of 1.8 T may be used as long as the core temperature
and noise levels are within permissible limits; these limits are generally achievable
with the step-lap core construction.
When a transformer is subjected to an over-excitation, core contains an amount
of flux sufficient to saturate it. The remaining flux spills out of the core. The overexcitation must be extreme and of a long duration to produce damaging effect in
the core laminations. The laminations can easily withstand temperatures in the
region of 800°C (they are annealed at this temperature during their manufacture),
but insulation in the vicinity of core laminations, viz. press-board insulation (class
A: 105°C) and core bolt insulation (class B: 130°C) may get damaged. Since the
flux flows in air (outside core) only during the part of a cycle when core gets
saturated, the air flux and exciting current are in the form of pulses having high
harmonic content which increases the eddy losses and temperature rise in
windings and structural parts. Guidelines for permissible short-time overexcitation of transformers are given in [14,15]. Generator transformers are more
susceptible for overvoltages due load rejection conditions and therefore need
special design considerations.

2.5 No-Load Loss Test
Hysteresis loss is a function of average voltage or maximum flux density, whereas
eddy loss is a function of r.m.s. voltage or r.m.s. flux density. Hence, the total core

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

47

loss is a function of voltage wave-shape. If the sine-wave excitation cannot be
ensured during the test, the following correction procedure can be applied to
derive the value of no-load loss on the sine wave basis [16, 17]. When a voltmeter
corresponding to the mean value is used, reading is proportional to the maximum
value of flux density in the core. Hence, if the applied non-sinusoidal voltage has
the same maximum flux density as that of the desired sine-wave voltage,
hysteresis loss will be measured corresponding to the sine wave. The r.m.s. value
may not be equal to r.m.s. value of desired sine wave; hence eddy loss has to be
corrected by using a factor Ke,

True core loss of transformer (Pc) on the sine wave basis is then calculated from the
measured loss (Pm) as
(2.12)

where
and
are hysteresis and eddy loss fractions of the total core loss
respectively. The following values are usually taken for these two fractions,
and

for cold rolled steel

and

for hot rolled steel

The calculation as per equation 2.12 is recommended in ANSI Standard
C57.12.90–1999. For highly distorted waveforms (with multiple zero crossings
per period), a correction which can be applied to this equation is given in [18].
As per IEC 60076–1 (Edition 2.1, 2000), the test voltage has to be adjusted
according to a voltmeter responsive to the mean value of voltage but scaled to read
the r.m.s. voltage of a sinusoidal wave having the same mean value (let the reading
of this voltmeter be V1). At the same time, a voltmeter responsive to the r.m.s.
value of voltage is connected in parallel with the mean value voltmeter and let its
reading be V. The test voltage wave shape is satisfactory if the readings V1 and V
are within 3% of each other. If the measured no-load loss is
Pm then the corrected no-load loss (Pc) is given as
(2.13)

where

(usually negative)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

48

Chapter 2

The method given in [19] allows the determination of the core loss from the
measured data under non-sinusoidal excitation without artificial separation of the
hysteresis and eddy current losses. Harmonic components are taken into account.
The computed results are compared with the IEC method.
A voltage regulator with a large capacitor bank is better than a conventional
rotating machine source from the point of view of getting as sinusoidal voltage as
possible for core loss measurements.
The no-load loss test and the calculation of parameters of shunt branch of the
equivalent circuit of a transformer have been elaborated in Chapter 1. Now,
special topics/case studies related to the no-load test are discussed.
2.5.1 Asymmetrical magnetizing phenomenon
Unlike in a bank of three single-phase transformers having independent magnetic
circuits, a three-phase three-limb transformer has interlinked magnetic circuit.
The excitation current and power drawn by each phase winding are not the actual
current and power required by the corresponding magnetic sections of the core.
The current drawn by each phase winding is determined by the combination of
requirements of all the three core branches. Consider a three-phase three-limb
core shown in figure 2.7. Let the magnetomotive force required to produce
instantaneous values of fluxes (
and ) in the path between points P1 to P2
for the phase windings (r, y and b) be
and
respectively. There is an
inherent asymmetry in the core as the length of magnetic path of winding y
between the points P1 and P2 is less than that of windings r and b. Let the actual
currents drawn be Ir, Iy and Ib.

Figure 2.7 Three-phase three-limb core with Y connected primary

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

49

The following equations can be written:
(2.14)
(2.15)
(2.16)
For a Y-connected winding (star connected without grounded neutral),
Ir+Iy+Ib=0

(2.17)

It follows from equations 2.14 to 2.17 that
(2.18)
(2.19)
(2.20)
where Iz is the zero-sequence component of the currents required to establish the
required magnetomotive forces,
(2.21)
Higher the magnetizing asymmetry, higher is the magnitude of I z. The
magnetomotive force, NIz, is responsible for producing a zero-sequence leakage
flux in the space outside core between points P1 and P2 [20]. The magnitude of this
zero-sequence leakage flux is quite small as compared to the mutual flux in the
core. For convenience, the reluctance of the magnetic path of winding y between
points P1 and P2 is taken as half that of windings r and b. For sinusoidal applied
voltages, fluxes are also sinusoidal, and the excitation current required then
contains harmonics due to non-linear magnetic characteristics. Thus, the required
excitation currents in three-phases can be expressed as (harmonics of order more
than 3 are neglected)
(2.22)
(2.23)
(2.24)
where Ic is the core loss component, and a negative sign is taken for third harmonic
components [21] to get a peaky nature of the excitation current (for a sinusoidal

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

50

Chapter 2

flux, excitation current is peaky in nature due to non-linear magnetic
characteristics). Substituting these expressions in equation 2.21,
(2.25)
After substituting this expression for Iz and expressions for
and from
equations 2.22 to 2.24 in equations 2.18 to 2.20, the actual excitation currents
drawn are
(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)
The condition that the sum of 3rd harmonic currents in three phases has to be zero
(since the neutral is isolated) is satisfied by above three equations. The essence of
the mathematical treatment can be understood by the vector diagrams of
fundamental and third harmonic components shown in figure 2.8. The magnitudes
of Ir and Ib are almost equal and these are greater than the magnitude of Iy. The
current Iy, though smallest of all the three currents, is higher than the current
required to excite middle phase alone
The currents in the outer limbs
are slightly less than that needed to excite outer limbs alone (
and
).In
actual practice, the currents Ir and Ib may differ slightly due to minor differences in
the characteristics of their magnetic paths (e.g., unequal air gap lengths at corner
joints). The third harmonic component drawn by phase y is greater than that of
phases r and b.
Since the applied voltage is assumed to be sinusoidal, only the fundamental
component contributes to the power. The power corresponding to phase r will be
negative if Iz is large enough to cause the angle between Vr and Ir to exceed 90°.
Negative power is read in one of the phases during the no-load loss test for
transformers whose yoke lengths are quite appreciable as compared to limb
heights increasing the asymmetry between the middle and outer phases.
It has been proved in [22] that for a length of central limb between points P1 and
P2 equal to half that of outer limbs (reluctance of central limb is half that of outer
limbs) in figure 2.7,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

51

Figure 2.8 Magnetizing asymmetry

Ir:Iy:Ib=1:0.718:1

(2.29)

The effect of change in excitation is illustrated for r phase in figure 2.9. During
no-load loss test, losses are generally measured at 90%, 100% and 110% of the
rated voltage. The magnetizing component of excitation current is more sensitive
to the increase in flux density as compared to the core loss component.
Consequently as the voltage is increased, the no-load power factor decreases. The
value of Iz also increases and hence the possibility of reading negative power
increases with the increase in applied voltage. When the angle between Vr and Ir is
90°, the r phase wattmeter reads zero, and if it exceeds 90° the wattmeter reads
negative.

Figure 2.9 Effect of excitation level

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

52

Chapter 2

The magnetizing asymmetry phenomenon described above has been analyzed
by using mutual impedances between 3 windings in [23]. It is shown that phase
currents and powers are balanced if mutual impedances Zry, Zyb and Zbr are equal.
These impedances are function of number of turns and disposition of windings,
winding connections within a phase and more importantly on dimensions and
layout of the core. These mutual impedances, which are unbalanced in threephase three-limb core (Zry=Zyb⫽Zbr), redistribute the power shared between the
three phases. The form of asymmetry occurring in the phase currents and powers
is different for three-limb and five-limb cores. It is reported that there is star point
displacement in a five-limb transformer, which tends to reduce the unbalance
caused by the inequality of mutual impedances.
Similar analysis can be done for a delta connected primary winding, for which
the measured line current is the difference between currents of the corresponding
two phases. It can be proved that [24] when the delta connected winding is
energized, for Yd1 or Dy11 connection, line current drawn by r phase is higher
than that drawn by y and b phases, which are equal (Ir-L>Iy-L=Ib-L). For Yd11 or Dy1
connection, the line current drawn by b phase is higher than that drawn by r and y
phases, which are equal (Ib-L>Iy-L=Ir-L). It should be noted that, for the delta
connected primary winding also, the magnetic section corresponding to y phase
requires least magnetizing current, i.e.,
but the phasor addition of
two phase currents results into a condition that line current Iy-L equals the current
of one of the outer phases.
2.5.2 Magnetic balance test
This test is performed at works or site as an investigative test to check the
healthiness of windings and core. In this test, a low voltage (say, 230 V) is
applied to a winding of one phase with all other windings kept open circuited.
Voltages induced in the corresponding windings of other two phases are
measured. When a middle phase (y) is excited, voltage induced in r and b phases
should be in the range of 40 to 60% of the applied voltage. Ideally it should be
50% but due to difference in reluctance of the magnetic paths corresponding to
r and b phases (on account of minor differences in air gaps at joints, etc.), some
deviation from the expected values need not be considered as abnormal. When r
(or b) phase is excited, one may get y-phase induced voltage as high as 90% and
the voltage induced in b (or r) phase as low as 10% for a healthy core. The
addition of r.m.s. voltages induced in unexcited phases need not necessarily be
equal to the voltage applied to the excited phase due to non-linear characteristics
of the magnetic circuit and the harmonics present in the fluxes of the unexcited
limbs.
The results of the magnetic balance test should be taken as indicative ones and
some other test (e.g., no-load loss test at rated voltage in manufacturer’s works)
should be performed to confirm the conclusions. The magnetic balance test can be

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

53

done at various stages of manufacturing, viz. before and after connections, before
final tests, before dispatch; these test results can be used for comparison with those
done at any subsequent time to check whether any problem is developed in the
core and windings. If the voltages measured do not fall in the expected range, a
problem in core or windings can be suspected. Suppose there is a turn-to-turn fault
in r phase. When a low voltage is applied to y phase winding, instead of getting
almost equal induced voltages in r and b phase windings, a much higher voltage
is obtained in b phase winding as fault current circulating in the faulty section,
opposes the magnetizing flux compared to that of r phase, indicating a fault in
winding of phase r. A high thereby reducing the induced voltage in the faulty
phase. For the test, the core should be demagnetized because a slight
magnetization (e.g., after resistance measurement) can give erratic results. The
demagnetization can be achieved by a repeated application of variable AC voltage
which is slowly reduced to zero.
2.5.3 Trouble-shooting by no-load loss test
Detection and location of turn-to-turn fault can be done by the results of no-load
loss test. Suppose, it is suspected that during impulse testing a particular winding
has failed. The turn-to-turn fault may not result in appreciable change in the
transfer function (impedance) of the winding and hence there is no appreciable
disturbance noticed in the recorded impulse waveforms. The fault in the suspected
winding can be confirmed by doing a no-load loss test. Therefore, it is usually
recommended to do the no-load loss test after all high voltage dielectric tests for
detecting any developed fault in the windings. No-load loss value shoots up for a
fault between turns. In order to locate the exact position of a fault, the parallel
conductors are electrically separated at both ends, and then resistance is measured
between all the points available (1, 1', 2, 2', 3, 3') as shown in figure 2.10 for a
winding with 3 parallel conductors.
Let us assume that each of the parallel conductors is having a resistance of 0.6
ohms. If the fault is at a location 70% from the winding bottom between conductor
1 of one turn and conductor 3 of next turn, then the measured values of resistances

Figure 2.10 Trouble-shooting during no-load loss test

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

54

Chapter 2

between 1-3 and 1'-3' will be 0.36 ohms (2×0.3×0.6) and 0.84 ohms (2×0.7×0.6)
respectively. A voltage corresponding to one turn circulates very high currents
since these are limited only by above resistances (reactance in path is negligible).
The increase in no-load loss corresponds approximately to the loss in these two
resistance paths due to circulating currents.
2.5.4 Effect of impulse test on no-load loss
A slight increase of about few % in the no-load loss is sometimes observed after
impulse tests due to partial breakdown of interlaminar insulation (particularly at
the edges) resulting into higher eddy loss. The phenomenon has been analyzed in
[25], wherein it is reported that voltages are induced in core by electrostatic as
well as electromagnetic inductions. The core loss increase of an average value of
less than 2% has been reported. It is further commented that the phenomenon is
harmful to the extent that it increases the loss and that the loss will not increase at
site. Application of an adhesive at the edges can prevent this partial and localized
damage to the core during the high voltage tests.

2.6 Impact of Manufacturing Processes on Core
Performance
For building cores of various ratings of transformers, different lamination widths
are required. Since the lamination rolls are available in some standard widths from
material suppliers, slitting operation is required to get the required widths. It is
obvious that most of the times a full width cannot be utilized and the scrap of
leftover material has to be minimized by a meticulous planning exercise. A
manufacturer having a wide product range, generally uses the leftover of large
transformer cores for the cores of small distribution transformers.
The next operation is that of cutting the laminations in different shapes (e.g.,
mitred joint in figure 2.3). Finally, the corner protrusions of the built core are cut
because they are not useful (do not carry the flux), and they may contribute to the
noise level of the transformer due to their vibrations.
In a bolted yoke construction, which ensures rigidity of the core, holes are
punched in the yoke laminations. There is distortion of flux at the position of holes
as shown in figure 2.11.

Figure 2.11 Effect of yoke bolts

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

55

This leads to an increase in core loss. Hence, many manufactures use boltless
yoke construction, in which special clamping arrangement consisting of fiberglass/stainless steel bands is adopted. The boltless yoke construction results in
better utilization of core material and reduction in core loss. Small guiding holes
are needed to facilitate the placement of laminations and core-building. In order to
strengthen the bonding of laminations, suitable epoxy resin is applied at the edges
of yoke laminations, which also results in reduction of noise level.
The processes of slitting, cutting and punching result in edges having burrs,
which not only worsen the stacking factor but also result into shorting of adjacent
laminations (due to damage of insulation coating) increasing eddy losses. The
upper limit of acceptable burr level is about 20 microns. A lower burr level
improves the stacking factor of the core and reduces loss. Higher the stacking
factor of laminations (which may be about 0.97 to 0.98), higher is the core area
obtained leading to a more cost effective design. This staking factor, which is
decided by lamination coating and burr, is different than the core space factor
(which of the order of 0.88 to 0.90). The core space factor is defined as the actual
core area obtained divided by the core circle area. The burrs can be removed by
passing the laminations through a de-burring process. A thin coating of varnish
may be applied at the edges to cover up the scratches formed during the de-burring
process.
All the above processes and multiple handling of laminations result into
development of mechanical strains inside the laminations, disturbing the original
grain orientation and thereby causing increase in core loss. This effect can be
mitigated by annealing the laminations at a temperature of about 800°C under
inert gas atmosphere. If state-of-the-art lamination slitting and cutting machines
having high degree of automation are used, handling of laminations is reduced
substantially and hence annealing is not considered necessary.
Core limbs are generally made of a large number of steps in order to get a
maximum core area for a given core diameter leading to an optimum design.
Yokes on the other hand may have lesser number of steps to provide better axial
support to the windings. The mismatch in number of limb and yoke steps may
result into some extra loss at the corner joints.
One question which is many times asked by production and planning
departments is: Can materials of different grades be mixed to overcome the
problem of non-availability of a particular grade in sufficient quantity? Needless
to say, one can mix only a better grade material, which can give marginal
reduction in the no-load loss. Actually, the grade mixing should not be
encouraged. In exceptional cases, however, mixing of a better grade may be
allowed to minimize shop inventory problems.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

56

Chapter 2

2.7 Inrush Current
2.7.1 Theory
If it were possible to switch on a transformer exactly at an instant of a voltage wave
which corresponds to the actual flux density in the core at that instant, it would
not have resulted in any transient. In actual practice, a transient phenomenon in
the form of inrush current is unavoidable since the instant of switching cannot be
easily controlled and the instant of switching favourable to one phase is not
favourable to other two phases.
When a transformer is switched off, the excitation current follows the
hysteresis curve to zero, whereas the flux density value changes to a non-zero
value Br as evident from the hysteresis loop in figure 2.5 (point D). For a residual
flux density of +Br, a maximum inrush current is drawn when a transformer is
switched on at the instant when the applied voltage is zero as shown in figure 2.12.
If transformer was not switched off, excitation current (i) and flux density would
have followed the dotted curves. As per the constant flux linkage theorem,
magnetic flux in an inductive circuit cannot change suddenly; the flux just after
closing the switch (at t=0+) must remain equal to the flux just before closing the
switch (at t=0-). Hence, the flux density, instead of starting from the negative
maximum value (-Bmp), starts from +Br and reaches the peak positive value of
(Br+2Bmp) driving the core into saturation.

Figure 2.12 Case of maximum inrush current

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

57

Figure 2.13 Flux wave

For an applied sinusoidal voltage, the flux density is sinusoidal and magnetizing
current is peaky in nature. The same result can be obtained by solving the
following governing equation:
(2.30)
where
Vp=peak value of the applied voltage
θ=angle at which voltage is switched on
i0=instantaneous value of magnetizing current
φm=instantaneous value of flux at any time t
R1=primary winding resistance
N1=primary winding turns
The solution of the equation is quite straightforward when linear magnetic
characteristics are assumed. The solution is obtained by using the initial
conditions that at
(2.31)
the waveform of flux (flux density) is shown in
For θ=0 and residual flux of
figure 2.13. It can be observed from equation 2.31 and the flux waveform that the
flux wave has a transient DC component, which decays at a rate determined by the
ratio of resistance to inductance of primary winding (R1/L1), and a steady-state AC
component
A typical waveform of an inrush current is shown
in figure 2.14 for a phase switched on at the most unfavourable instant (i.e., at zero
crossing of the applied voltage wave).

Figure 2.14 Typical inrush current waveform

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

58

Chapter 2

It can be observed that the current waveform is completely offset in first few
cycles with wiping out of alternate half cycles because the flux density is below
saturation value for these half cycles (resulting in very small current value).
Hence, the inrush current is highly asymmetrical and has a predominant second
harmonic component which is used by differential protection schemes to restrain
relays from operating.
Time constant (L/R) of the circuit is not constant; the value of L changes
depending on the extent of core saturation. During the first few cycles,
saturation is high and L is low. Hence, initial rate of decay of inrush current is
quite high. As the losses damp the circuit and saturation drops, L increases
slowing down the decay. Hence, the decay of inrush current starts with a high
initial rate and progressively reduces; the total phenomenon lasts for few
seconds. Smaller transformers have higher rates of decay. In general,
transformers having higher losses (lower efficiency) have higher decay rates of
inrush current [26].
While arriving at equation 2.31, linear magnetic characteristics are assumed,
which is a major approximation. Accurate procedures for calculation of inrush
currents for single-phase transformers is given in a number of references [27,28]
in which non-linear magnetic characteristics are elaborately represented. For
estimation of inrush current in three-phase transformers, the analysis is more
involved [29,30,31]. A method of calculation of inrush currents in harmonic
domain for single-phase and three-phase transformers using operational matrices
is given in [32]. Inrush currents of transformers and associated overvoltages in
HVDC systems are dealt in [33], wherein AC system impedance, which is
generally inductive (that of generators, transformers and transmission lines), is
shown to resonate with filters on AC bus-bars (which act as lumped capacitance
below fifth harmonic). If the resulting resonance frequency of the combined AC
system and filters is equal to or close to a harmonic component of inrush current of
the same frequency, overvoltages occur.
2.7.2 Estimation of magnitude of first peak
A transformer user is generally interested in knowing the maximum value of
inrush current and the rate of decay of inrush current. If the saturation flux density
of core material is 2.03 T, the flux of magnitude (2.03×Ac) is contained in the core,
where Ac is the net core area. Rest of the flux spills out of the core, whose path is
predominantly in air. The ampere-turns required to produce the air flux are so
large that they can be also assumed to produce 2.03 T in the core. For the worst
instant of switching it can be written that
(2.32)
where Aw is the mean area enclosed by a winding turn. Hence, the maximum
inrush current (first peak), i0max, drawn by the energized winding with N1 turns and

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

59

hw height can be calculated for a single-phase transformer from the following
equation (H is magnetic field intensity) as
(2.33)

(2.34)
For three-phase transformers, calculation of inrush current needs more
explanation. Let us consider the following three cases:
1) If it is a delta connected primary, each of the phases is independently
connected to the network, and the inrush phenomenon corresponding to flux of
each phase takes place as in the case of a single-phase transformer. This results in
the same value of phase inrush current as that of the single-phase transformer. But
in terms of line currents, inrush is less severe. Under normal operating conditions,
line current is
times the phase current. During the inrush condition, only one
phase is having large inrush current (the phase which gets switched at the worst or
near worst instant of voltage switching); hence the line current is almost equal to
the phase current. Hence, the per-unit line inrush current of three-phase
transformer with delta connected primary is 0.577 times
the
corresponding inrush current of a single-phase transformer.
2) For a bank of three single-phase transformers having independent magnetic
circuits, with star connected primary and delta connected secondary, the current
distribution expressed in terms of the maximum inrush current (i0max) of singlephase transformer is shown in figure 2.15. It is assumed that phase a has the
maximum transient inrush current.

Figure 2.15 Inrush in Y-delta bank of transformers

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

60

Chapter 2

Since the delta allows the flow of zero-sequence currents, it holds the neutral
voltage at a stable value and maintains the normal line-to-neutral voltages across
the phases. The presence of delta also ensures full single-phase transient in the
phase that has maximum inrush transient (phase a in this case). Two-thirds of the
required single-phase inrush current (2i0max/3) flows in phase a on the star side and
the remaining one-third flows on the delta side. Hence, the maximum inrush
current in this case is two-thirds that of single-phase transformer. The phases b and
c do not get magnetized since currents in them are equal and opposite on the star
and delta sides.
3) A three-phase three-limb transformer, in which the phases are magnetically
interlinked, can be treated as consisting of three independent single-phase
transformers [17,29] under inrush transients. Hence, for a star connected primary
winding, the inrush phenomenon is similar to that of Case 2, irrespective of
whether secondary is star or delta winding. Maximum inrush current is
approximately equal to two-thirds of that corresponding to single-phase operation
of one limb.
2.7.3 Estimation of decay pattern
The equation 2.34 is an approximate formula giving maximum possible inrush
current. The operating engineers may be interested in knowing inrush current
peak values for the first few cycles or the time after which inrush current reduces
to a value equal to the rated current. The procedures for estimating inrush current
peaks for first few cycles are given in [34,35]. The procedures are generally
applicable for some tens of initial cycles.
Example 2.1
Calculate inrush current peaks for first 5 cycles for a 31.5 MVA, 132/33 kV, 50 Hz,
Yd1 transformer, when energized from 132 kV winding having 920 turns, mean
diameter of 980 mm and height of 1250 mm. The peak operating flux density is
1.7 T for core area of 0.22 m2. The sum of system and winding resistances is 0.9
ohms.
Solution:
The transformer is assumed to be energized at the instant when voltage is at zero
value. It is also assumed that the residual flux is in the same direction as that of the
initial flux change, thus giving a maximum possible value of inrush current. After
the core saturation, the inrush current gets limited by air core reactance, Xs, which
can be calculated by the fundamental formula.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

61

Step 1:

(2.35)

Step 2:
Now angle θ is calculated [34], which corresponds to the instant at which the
core saturates,
(2.36)
where Bs=saturation flux density=2.03 Tesla
Bmp=peak value of designed steady-state flux density in the core=1.7 T
Br=residual flux density=0.8×Bmp=1.36 T
(For cold rolled material, maximum residual flux density is usually taken as
80% of the rated peak flux density, whereas for hot rolled material it can be
taken as 60% of the rated peak flux density)
K1=correction factor for saturation angle=0.9

Step 3:
The inrush current peak for the first cycle is calculated as [34],
(2.37)
where V=r.m.s. value of applied alternating voltage
K2=correction factor for the peak value =1.15

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

62

Chapter 2

The current calculated by equation 2.34, for a core area of 0.22 m2 is

which is very close to that calculated by the more accurate method.
Step 4:
After having calculated the value of inrush current peak for the first cycle, the
residual flux density at the end of first cycle is calculated. The residual component
of flux density reduces due to losses in the circuit and hence is a function of
damping provided by the transformer losses. The new value of residual flux
density is calculated as [34]
(2.38)
where R=sum of transformer winding resistance and system resistance
=0.9 ohms
K3=correction factor for the decay of inrush=2.26

Now steps 2, 3 and 4 are repeated to calculate the peaks of subsequent cycles. The
inrush current peaks for the first 5 cycles are: 869 A, 846 A, 825 A, 805 A and 786
A on single phase basis. Since it is a Y-delta connected three-phase three-limb
transformer, actual line currents are approximately two-thirds of these values (579
A, 564 A, 550 A, 537 A and 524 A).
The inrush of magnetizing current may not be harmful to a transformer itself
(although repeated switching on and off in short period of time is not advisable).
Behavior of transformer under inrush condition continues to attract attention of
researchers. The differences in forces acting on the windings during inrush and
short circuit conditions are enumerated in [36]. Inrush may result in the
inadvertent operation of the overload and differential relays, tripping the
transformer out of the circuit as soon as it is switched on. Relays which
discriminate between inrush and fault conditions are commonly used. Some of
their features are:
1) Differential relay with second harmonic restraint, which makes use of the
fact that the inrush current has a predominant second harmonic component which
is used to prevent the relay from operating.
2) Differential relay with reduced sensitivity to the inrush current by virtue of
higher pick-up for the offset wave plus a time delay to override high initial peaks
of the inrush current.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

63

Figure 2.16 Sympathetic inrush

A technique of discriminating inrush current and internal fault is described in
[37], which uses wavelet transforms and neural networks. The ability of wavelet
transforms to extract information from the transient signals simultaneously in
time and frequency domains is used for the discrimination. Large inrush may
cause an excessive momentary dip in the supply voltage affecting operation of
other interconnected electrical equipment. Switching on of a particular
transformer in an interconnected network can affect already energized
transformers as explained below.
2.7.4 Sympathetic inrush phenomenon
It has long been known that transient magnetizing inrush currents, sometimes
reaching magnitudes as high as six to eight times the rated current, flow in a
transformer winding when switched on to an electric power network. It has not
been generally appreciated, however, that the other transformers, already
connected to the network near the transformer being switched, may also have a
transient magnetizing current of appreciable magnitude at the same time. In order
to understand how energizing of a transformer in a network affects the operating
conditions of other transformers connected to the same network, consider a
network as shown in figure 2.16.
When transformer B is switched on to the network already feeding similar
transformers (C) in the neighbourhood, the transient magnetizing inrush current
of the switched-on transformer also flows into these other transformers and
produces in them a DC flux which gets superimposed on their normal AC
magnetizing flux. This gives rise to increased flux density and corresponding
higher magnetizing currents in these other transformers in the neighborhood [17,
38,39]. This sympathetic inrush current in these other transformers is less than
their own inrush current when energized. Depending on the magnitude of
decaying DC component, this sympathetic (indirect) inrush phenomenon leads to
an increased noise level of these connected transformers due to higher core flux
density for the transient period. It may also lead to mal-operation of protective
equipment of these transformers. The phenomenon of increase in noise level of an

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

64

Chapter 2

upstream power transformer during the energization of a downstream distribution
transformer (fed by the power transformer) has been analyzed in [40] supported
by noise level measurements done during switching tests at site.
Let us now analyze the case of parallel transformers shown in figure 2.17 (a).
The transformers may or may not be paralleled on the secondary side. The DC
component of inrush current of the transformer being energized flows through the
transmission line resistance (between source and transformer) producing a DC
voltage drop across it. The DC voltage drop forces the already energized
transformer towards/into saturation in opposite direction of the transformer which
is being switched on, resulting in a buildup of magnetizing current in the already
energized transformer; this rate of buildup is same as the rate at which DC
component of magnetizing current is decreasing in the transformer being
switched on. When the two parallel transformers are similar and magnitudes of
DC components of currents in both the transformers become equal, there is no DC
component in the line feeding both the transformers. However, there is a DC
component circulating in the loop circuit between them, whose rate of decay is
very slow due to high inductance and small resistance of windings of the two
transformers. The waveforms of currents are shown in figure 2.17 (b).

Figure 2.17 Inrush current in parallel transformers

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

65

Since the line current feeding the transformers becomes symmetrical
(waveform Ic) devoid of the second harmonic component, differential relaying
with second harmonic constraint is provided to each transformer separately
instead of protecting them as a unit [41]. The phenomenon is more severe when
transformers are fed from a weak system (transformers connected to a common
feeder with a limited fault level and high internal resistance).
2.7.5 Factors affecting inrush phenomenon
Various factors affecting the inrush current phenomenon are now summarized:
A. Switching-on angle (α )
Inrush current decreases when switching-on angle (on the voltage wave)
increases. It is maximum for α=0° and minimum for α=90°.
B. Residual flux density
Inrush current is significantly aggravated by residual flux density, which depends
upon core material characteristics and the power factor of the load at interruption
when a transformer was switched off. The instant of switching-off has an effect on
residual flux density depending upon the type of load [17]. The total current is
made up of the magnetizing current component and load current component. The
current interruption generally occurs at or near zero of the total current waveform.
The magnetizing current passes through its maximum value before the instant at
which total current is switched off for no load, lagging load and unity power factor
load conditions, resulting in maximum value of residual flux density as per B-H
curve of figure 2.5. For leading loads, if the leading component is less than the
magnetizing component, at zero of the resultant current the magnetizing
component will have reached the maximum value resulting in the maximum
residual. On the contrary, if the leading current component is more than the
magnetizing component, the angle between maximum of the magnetizing current
and zero of the resultant current will be more than 90°. Hence, at the interruption
of the resultant current, the magnetizing component will not have reached its
maximum resulting in a lower value of residual flux density.
Residual flux density also depends on the core material. Its maximum value
is usually taken as about 80% and 60% of the saturation value for cold rolled and
hot rolled materials respectively. It is also a function of joint characteristics.
Hence, its value for a core with the mitred joint is different than that with the
step-lap joint.
C. Series resistance
The resistance of line between the source and transformer has a predominant
effect on the inrush phenomenon. Due to the damping effect, series resistance

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

66

Chapter 2

between the transformer and source not only reduces the maximum initial inrush
current but also hastens its decay rate. Transformers near a generator usually have
a longer inrush because of low line resistance. Similarly, large power transformers
tend to have a long inrush as they have a large inductance as compared to the
system resistance.
Consider a series circuit of two transformers, T feeding T1 as shown in figure
2.18. When transformer T1 is energized, transformer T experiences sympathetic
inrush. Resistance between T and T1 contributes mainly to the decay of inrush of
T1 (and T) [42] and not the resistance on the primary side of T.
In case of parallel transformers (figure 2.17), the sympathetic inrush
phenomenon experienced by the transformer already energized is due to the
coupling between the transformers on account of DC voltage drop in the
transmission line feeding them. Hence, the higher the transmission line resistance
the higher is the sympathetic inrush [43].
D. Inrush under load
If a transformer is switched on with load, the inrush peaks are affected to some
extent by the load power factor. When it is switched on under heavy load (large
secondary current) with the power factor close to unity, the peak value of inrush
current is smaller, and as the power factor reduces (to either lagging or leading),
the inrush current peak is higher [27].
2.7.5 Mitigation of inrush current
During the inrush phenomenon, inrush current in the saturated core condition is
limited by the air-core reactance of the windings and hence it is usually lower than
the peak short-circuit current due to faults. Since transformers are designed to
withstand mechanical effects of short circuit forces, inrush currents may not be
considered to be dangerous, although they may unnecessarily cause operation of
protective equipment like relays and fuses.
One of the natural ways of reducing inrush current is to switch-in transformers
through a closing resistor. The rated voltage is applied through a large resistor so
that the voltage at the transformer terminals is lower than the rated value (e.g.,
50%) reducing the inrush current. The resistor is subsequently by-passed to apply
full voltage to the transformer. Such a scheme with pre-insertion (closing)
resistors is recommended in [33,44] to suppress the inrush currents in
transformers. The closing resistor should be small enough to allow passage of the
normal magnetizing current.

Figure 2.18 Sympathetic inrush in series connection

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

67

If possible, a transformer should be switched from its high voltage winding,
which is usually the outer winding in core-type transformers and therefore has a
higher air core reactance resulting in a lower value of inrush current.
Since residual flux is one of the main reasons for high inrush currents, any
attempt to reduce it helps in mitigating the inrush phenomenon. When a
transformer is being switched off, if a capacitor of suitable size is connected
across it [26], a damped oscillation will result, causing an alternating current to
flow in the transformer winding. The amplitude of current decreases with time,
gradually reducing the area of the traversed hysteresis loop, eventually reducing
both current and residual flux to zero. For small transformers, a variable AC
source can be used to demagnetize the core. The applied voltage can be slowly
reduced to zero for demagnetization.
Various schemes of controlled closing at favourable instants have been
proposed in [45]. In these methods, each winding is closed when the prospective
and dynamic (transient) core fluxes are equal resulting in an optimal energization
without core saturation or inrush transients.

2.8 Influence of Core Construction and Winding
Connections on No-Load Harmonic Phenomenon
The excitation current is a small percentage of the rated current in transformers.
With the increase in rating of transformers, generally the percentage no-load
current reduces. The harmonics in the excitation current may cause interference
with communication systems and result into inadvertent tripping of protective
equipment. Due to non-linear magnetic characteristics, it can be said that:
1) for a sinusoidal applied voltage, the flux is sinusoidal and magnetizing
current is peaky in nature with a pronounced third harmonic component.
2) if the magnetizing current is constrained to have the sinusoidal nature, the
flux wave will be flat-topped. The induced voltages in windings will be peaky in
nature with a pronounced third harmonic component.
Harmonic phenomenon in a three-phase transformer depends on the type of
magnetic circuit (separate or inter-linked) and the type of winding connections
(star/delta/zigzag). Let us consider the following common cases:
1) Yy connection (isolated neutral): Since the neutral is isolated, third harmonic
currents cannot flow in phases and lines making the magnetizing current almost
sinusoidal (if higher harmonics are neglected). This results into a flat-topped flux
wave. For transformers having independent magnetic circuits (bank of singlephase transformers), there is a low reluctance magnetic path available (in the form
of end limbs) for the third harmonic flux. Due to the corresponding induced third
harmonic voltages in three phases, the neutral gets shifted. Since the third
harmonic voltages are at thrice the fundamental frequency, the neutral voltage
oscillates at thrice the fundamental frequency causing fluctuations in the line to

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

68

Chapter 2

neutral voltages. For the third harmonic flux of x% of the fundamental
component, the third harmonic voltage is 3 x% of the fundamental frequency
voltage as explained in Section 2.3. This increases voltage stresses due to higher
resultant r.m.s. line to neutral voltages. Hence, Yy transformers with independent
magnetic circuits are usually not preferred. The behavior of three-phase five-limb
transformers is similar to that of bank of single-phase transformers since the path
(provided by end yokes and end limbs) is available for the third harmonic flux (as
long as third harmonic fluxes are not high enough to cause saturation of this
magnetic path). These disadvantages of Yy connection are to a large extent
overcome in three-phase three-limb transformers. The third harmonic flux, which
flows in the same direction in all the three phases, has to return from one yoke to
another through the surrounding non-magnetic paths having high reluctance. This
reduces the third harmonic flux and the associated effects such as neutral
instability.
For the same reason, a moderate single-phase load can be taken between line
and neutral in three-phase three-limb transformers without undue unbalancing
of phase voltages. The disadvantage, however, is that the flux returning
through paths outside the core causes additional stray losses in the structural
parts.
It should be noted that line-to-line voltage is free of third harmonic components
in the case of Y connected winding because these components present in phase to
neutral voltages get cancelled in the line to line voltage. Sometimes a tertiary delta
winding is provided with a Yy transformer so that the third harmonic currents can
flow in the closed delta making the flux and voltage almost sinusoidal.
2) Yy connection with neutral: If the system and transformer neutrals are
grounded, the third harmonic voltages will practically disappear due to the fact
that there is a path available for the third harmonic currents to flow. This
connection is equivalent to application of an independent excitation to each phase.
The main disadvantage of this connection is that the third harmonic currents cause
interference in communication circuits running parallel to power lines. If a tertiary
delta winding is provided, the third harmonic ground currents will be reduced but
not completely eliminated; the current shared by the tertiary winding depends on
the relative value of impedances offered by the two paths.
3) Yd or Dy connection: Due to the presence of a delta connected winding, these
connections are free of third harmonic voltage problems associated with the Y
connections. The neutral is also stabilized permitting a moderate single-phase
load from line to neutral. For a delta connected primary winding under a no-load
condition, although phases carry third harmonic currents, they get cancelled in
lines (this is not strictly true because the magnitude of third harmonic current
components in three phases are not necessarily equal due to the magnetizing
asymmetry as described in Section 2.5.1).

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

69

2.9 Transformer Noise
Transformers located near a residential area should have sound level as low as
possible. A low noise transformer is being increasingly specified by transformer
users; noise levels specified are 10 to 15 dB lower than the prevailing levels
mentioned in the international standards (e.g., NEMA-TR1: Sound levels in
transformers and reactors, 1981). The design and manufacture of a transformer
with a low sound level require in-depth understanding of sources of noise. Core,
windings and cooling equipment are the three main sources of noise. The core is
the most important and significant source of the transformer noise, which is
elaborated in this chapter. The other two sources of noise are discussed in Chapter
10 along with the noise reduction techniques.
The core vibrates due to magnetic and magnetostrictive forces. Magnetic
forces appear due to non-magnetic gaps at the corner joints of limbs and yokes.
The force per unit cross-sectional area can be given as
(2.39)

where Bmp = peak value of flux density in the gap between corresponding
laminations of yoke and limb
µ0 = permeability of free space
ω = fundamental angular frequency
These magnetic forces depend upon the kind of interlacing between the limb and
yoke; these are highest when there is no overlapping (continuous air gap). The
magnetic forces are smaller for 90° overlapping, which further reduce for 45°
overlapping. These are the least for the step-lap joint due to reduction in the value
of flux density in the overlapping region at the joint.
The forces produced by the magnetostriction phenomenon are much higher
than the magnetic forces in transformers. Magnetostriction is a change in
configuration of magnetizable material in a magnetic field, which leads to
periodic changes in the length of material. An alternating field sets the core in
vibration. This vibration is transmitted, after some attenuation, through the oil and
tank structure to the surrounding air. This finally results in a characteristic hum.
The magnetostriction phenomenon is characterized by the coefficient of
magnetostriction ε,
(2.40)
where l and Δl are length of lamination sheet and its change respectively. The
coefficient ε depends on the instantaneous value of flux density according to the
expression [46,47]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

70

Chapter 2

(2.41)

where B = instantaneous value of flux density
Kυ = coefficient which depends on level of magnetization, type of
lamination material and its treatment
With the increasing exponent (order number υ), the coefficients Kυ usually are
decreasing. The magnetostriction force is given by
F=ε(t)EA

(2.42)

where E is the modulus of elasticity in the direction of force and A is the crosssectional area of a lamination sheet. The previous two equations indicate that the
magnetostriction force varies with time and contains even harmonics of the power
frequency (120, 240, 360, —Hz for 60 Hz power frequency). Therefore, the noise
also contains all harmonics of 120 Hz. The amplitude of core vibration and noise
increase manifold if the fundamental mechanical natural frequency of the core is
close to 120 Hz. The natural frequencies of the core can be calculated
approximately by analytical/empirical formulae or by the more accurate Finite
Element Method.
A typical magnetostriction curve is shown in figure 2.19. The change in
dimension is not linearly proportional to the flux density. The value of the
magnetostriction can be positive or negative, depending on the type of the
magnetic material, and the mechanical and thermal treatments. Magnetostriction
is generally positive (increase in length by a few microns with increase in flux
density) for CRGO material at annealing temperatures below 800°C, and as the
annealing temperature is increased (≥800°C), it can be displaced to negative
values [48]. The mechanical stressing may change it to positive values.
Magnetostriction is minimum along the rolling direction and maximum along the
90° direction.

Figure 2.19 Magnetostriction curve

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

71

Most of the noise transmitted from a core comes principally from the yoke
region because the noise from the limb is effectively damped by windings (copper
and insulation material) around the limb. Hence, empirical/semi-empirical
formulae used by manufacturers for the noise level calculations have the yoke flux
density as a predominant factor. The quality of yoke clamping has a significant
influence on the noise level. Apart from the yoke flux density, other factors which
decide the noise level are: limb flux density, type of core material, leg center
(distance between the centers of two adjacent phases), core weight, frequency, etc.
The higher the flux density, leg centers, core weight and frequency of operation,
the higher is the noise level.
The noise level is closely related to the operating peak flux density and core
weight. The change in noise level as a function of these two factors can be
expressed as [49]:

(2.43)

If core weight is assumed to change with flux density approximately in inverse
proportion, for a flux density change from 1.6 T to 1.7 T, the increase in noise level
is 1.7 dB [≈64 Log10(1.7/1.6)]. Hence, one of the ways of reducing noise is by
designing transformer at lower operating flux density. For a flux density reduction
of 0.1 T, the noise level reduction of about 2 dB is obtained. This method results
into an increase of material content and it may be justified economically if the user
has specified a lower no-load loss, in which case the natural choice is to use a
lower flux density. The use of step-lap joint gives much better noise reduction (4
to 5 dB). The noise performance of step-lap joint is compared with that of mitred
joint in [50]. Some manufacturers also use yoke reinforcement (leading to
reduction in yoke flux density); the method has the advantage that copper content
does not go up since the winding mean diameters do not increase. Bonding of
laminations by adhesives and placing of anti-vibration/damping elements
between the core and tank can give further reduction in the noise level. The use of
Hi-B/scribed material can also give a reduction of 2 to 3 dB. When a noise level
reduction of the order of 15 to 20 dB is required, some of these methods are
necessary but not sufficient, and the methods involving changes in structural
design are adopted (which are discussed in Chapter 10).
In a gapped core shunt reactor, the vibration is quite high as compared to a
transformer due to forces between every two magnetic packets (sections)
separated by a non-magnetic gap of few tens of millimeters. The magnetic field
creates pulsating forces across these air gaps which can be calculated by equation
2.39. Hence, reactor cores are designed as very stiff structures to eliminate
excessive vibrations. The non-magnetic gaps are created and supported by placing
a non-magnetic material such as stone spacers or ceramic blocks having a high

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

72

Chapter 2

modulus of elasticity. The dimensional stability and core tightness can be further
ensured by placing epoxy impregnated polyester material and fiberglass cloth of 2
to 3 mm between the last limb packet and top/bottom yoke. The material gets
hardened after getting heated during the processing stage (heating and vacuum
cycles) and bonds the yoke with limb packet. Care should also be taken that the
fundamental mechanical natural frequency of vibration of reactor core structure is
more and sufficiently away from twice the power frequency.

References
1. Baehr, R. Up-to-date possibilities for further improvement of power transformer
magnetic circuit features, International Summer School of Transformers,
ISST’93, Lodz, Poland, 1993.
2. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Khaparde, S.A., and Arora, B. A modified
approach to overfluxing analysis of transformer, International Journal of
Electrical Power & Energy Systems, Vol. 20, No. 4, 1998, pp. 235–239.
3. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., and Khaparde, S.A. Overfluxing simulation
of transformer by 3D FEM analysis, Fourth Conference on EHV Technology,
IISc Bangalore, India, 1998, pp. 69–71.
4. Bean, R.L., Chackan, N., Moore, H.R., and Wentz, E.C. Transformers for the
electric power industry, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959, p. 103.
5. Karsai, K., Kerenyi, D., and Kiss, L. Large power transformers, Elsevier
Publication, Amsterdam, 1987, p. 41.
6. Girgis, R.S., teNijenhuis, E.G., Gramm, K., and Wrethag, J.E. Experimental
investigations on effect of core production attributes on transformer core loss
performance, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 13, No. 2, April
1998, pp. 526–531.
7. Lofler, F., Pfutzner, H., Booth, T., Bengtsson, C., and Gramm, K. Influence of
air gaps in staked cores consisting of several packages, IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, Vol. 30, No. 3, March 1994, pp. 913–915.
8. Elleuch, M. and Poloujadoff, M. New transformer model including joint air
gaps and lamination anisotropy, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 34,
No. 5, September 1998, pp. 3701–3711.
9. Mechler, G.F. and Girgis, R.S. Calculation of spatial loss distribution in stacked
power and distribution transformer cores, IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Vol. 13, No. 2, April 1998, pp. 532–537.
10. Olivares, J.C., Kulkarni, S.V., Canedo, J., Driesen, J., and Escarela, R. Impact
of joint design parameters on transformer losses, International Journal of
Power and Energy Systems, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2003, pp. 151–157.
11. teNyenhuis, E.G., Mechler, G.F., and Girgis, R.S. Flux distribution and core
loss calculation for single phase and five limb three phase transformer core
designs, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2000,
pp. 204–209.
12. Loffler, F., Booth, T., Pfutzner, H., Bengtsson, C, and Gramm, K. Relevance

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

73

of step-lap joints for magnetic characteristics of transformer cores, Proceedings
IEE—Electrical Power Applications, Vol. 142, No. 6, November 1995, pp.
371–378.
13. Mechler, G.F. and Girgis, R.S. Magnetic flux distributions in transformer core
joints, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 2000,
pp. 198–203.
14. Alexander, G.W., Corbin, S.L., and McNutt, W.J. Influence of design and
operating practices on excitation of generator step-up transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-85, No. 8, August
1966, pp. 901–909.
15. Gantner, J. and Birch, F.H. Transformer overfluxing protection, Electra, No.
31, Report of Working Group 01 of CIGRE Study Committee No. 34
(Protection), pp. 65–74.
16. Camilli, G. A flux voltmeter for magnetic tests, AIEE Transactions, 1926, pp.
721–728.
17. Blume, L.F., Boyajian, A., Camilli, G., Lennox, T.C., Minneci, S., and
Montsinger, V.M. Transformer engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York,
and Chapman and Hall, London, 1951.
18. Arseneau, R. and Moore, W.J.M. A method for estimating the sinusoidal iron
losses of a transformer from measurements made with distorted voltage
waveforms, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS103, No. 10, October 1984, pp. 2912–2918.
19. Tran-Quoc, T. and Pierrat, L. Correction of the measured core losses under
distorted flux, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 1997,
pp. 2045–2048.
20. Walker, C.S. The excitation requirements of 3-phase core-type 3-legged Yconnected transformers, AIEE Transactions, December 1957, pp. 1113–1119.
21. Kemp, P. Alternating current waveforms, Chapman and Hall Limited, Second
Edition, London, 1952.
22. Brailsford, F. Current and power relationships in the measurement of iron
losses in a three-limb transformer core, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 101, Pt. 2, 1954,
pp. 409–416.
23. Parion J.I. Magnetizing asymmetry in three-phase core-type transformers,
Electrical Energy, July 1957, pp. 330–336.
24. Nene, A.S., Kulkarni, S.V., and Vijayan, K. Asymmetrical magnetizing
phenomenon of three phase core type transformers, International Conference
on Transformers, TRAFOTECH-1994, Bangalore, India, January 1994, pp.
IV 21–26.
25. McWhirter, J.H., Specht, T.R., and Albright, W.D. Effect of impulse testing
on transformer iron loss, AIEE Transactions, February 1957, pp. 1275–1279.
26. Blume, L.F., Camilli, G., Farnham, S.B., and Peterson, H.A. Transformer
magnetizing inrush currents and influence on system operation, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 63, 1944, pp. 366–375.
27. Lin, C.E., Cheng, C.L., Huang, C.L., and Yeh, J.C. Investigation of magnetizing

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

74

Chapter 2

inrush current in transformers- Part I: Numerical simulation, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. 8, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 246–254.
28. Finzi, L.A. and Mutschler, W.H. The inrush of magnetizing current in singlephase transformers, AIEE Transactions, Vol. 70, 1951, pp. 1436–1438.
29. Yacamini, R. and Abu-Nasser, A. The calculation of inrush currents in threephase transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 133, Pt. B, No. 1, January 1986,
pp. 31–40.
30. Macfadyen, W.K., Simpson, R.R. S., Slater, R.D., and Wood, W.S. Method of
predicting transient current patterns in transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol.
120, No. 11, November 1973, pp. 1393–1396.
31. Nakra, H.L. and Barton, T.H. Three phase transformer transients, IEEE PES
Winter Meeting, New York, 1974, Paper T–74–243–2.
32. Rico, J.J., Acha, E., and Madrigal, M. The study of inrush current phenomenon
using operational matrices, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 16,
No. 2, April 2001, pp. 231–237.
33. Yacamini, R. and Abu-Nasser, A. Transformer inrush currents and their
associated overvoltages in HVDC schemes, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 133, Pt. C,
No. 6, September 1986, pp. 353–358.
34. Specht, T.R. Transformer magnetizing inrush current, AIEE Transactions, Vol.
70, 1951, pp. 323–328.
35. Holcomb, J.E. Distribution transformer magnetizing inrush current, AIEE
Transactions, December 1961, pp. 697–702.
36. Adly, A.A. Computation of inrush current forces on transformer windings,
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 37, No. 4, July 2001, pp. 2855–2857.
37. Mao, P.L. and Aggarwal, R.K. A novel approach to the classification of the
transient phenomenon in power transformers using combined wavelet
transform and neural network, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 16,
No. 4, October 2001, pp. 654–660.
38. Elmore, W.A. Protective relaying: theory and applications, Marcel Dekker,
New York, 1994, p. 146.
39. Rudenburg, R. Transient performance of electric power system, First Edition,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1950, pp. 640–641.
40. Kulkarni, S.V. Influence of system operating conditions on magnetizing inrush
phenomenon of transformer, International Conference on Transformers,
TRAFOTECH-94, Bangalore, India, January 1994, pp. VI 19–23.
41. Mason, C.R. Art and science of protective relaying, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1956, pp. 259–261.
42. Bronzeado, H. and Yacamini, R. Phenomenon of sympathetic interaction
between transformers caused by inrush transients, Proceedings IEE—Science,
Measurement and Technology, Vol. 142, No. 4, July 1995, pp. 323–329.
43. Hayward, C.D. Prolonged inrush currents with parallel transformers affect
differential relaying, AIEE Transactions, Vol. 60, 1941, pp. 1096–1101.
44. Holmgrem, B., Jenkins, R.S., and Riubrugent, J. Transformer inrush current,
CIGRE 1968, Paper No. 12–03.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Magnetic Characteristics

75

45. Brunke, J.H. and Frohlich, K.J. Elimination of transformer inrush currents by
controlled switching- Part I: Theoretical considerations, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. 16, No. 2, April 2001, pp. 276–285.
46. Krondl, M. and Kronauer, E. Some contributions to the problem of transformer
noise, Bulletin Oerlikon, No. 356, pp. 1–15.
47. Majer, K. Evaluation of transformer noise and vibrations, International Summer
School of Transformers, ISST’93, Lodz, Poland, 1993.
48. Foster, S.L. and Reiplinger, E. Characteristics and control of transformer sound,
IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-100, No. 3,
March 1981, pp. 1072–1075.
49. Brandes, D. Noise levels of medium power transformers,
Elektrizitatswirtschaft, No. 11, 1977.
50. Weiser, B., Pfutzner, B., and Anger, J. Relevance of magnetostriction and forces
for the generation of audible noise of transformer cores, IEEE Transactions
on Magnetics, Vol. 36, No. 5, September 2000, pp. 3759–3777.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

3
Impedance Characteristics

The leakage impedance of a transformer is one of the most important
specifications that has significant impact on its overall design. Leakage
impedance, which consists of resistive and reactive components, has been
introduced and explained in Chapter 1. This chapter focuses on the reactive
component (leakage reactance), whereas Chapters 4 and 5 deal with the resistive
component. The load loss (and hence the effective AC resistance) and leakage
impedance are derived from the results of short circuit test. The leakage reactance
is then calculated from the impedance and resistance (Section 1.5 of Chapter 1).
Since the resistance of a transformer is generally quite less as compared to its
reactance, the latter is almost equal to the leakage impedance. Material cost of the
transformer varies with the change in specified impedance value. Generally, a
particular value of impedance results into a minimum transformer cost. It will be
expensive to design the transformer with impedance below or above this value. If
the impedance is too low, short circuit currents and forces are quite high, which
necessitate use of lower current density thereby increasing the material content.
On the other hand, if the impedance required is too high, it increases the eddy loss
in windings and stray loss in structural parts appreciably resulting into much
higher load loss and winding/oil temperature rise; which again will force the
designer to increase the copper content and/or use extra cooling arrangement. The
percentage impedance, which is specified by transformer users, can be as low as
2% for small distribution transformers and as high as 20% for large power
transformers. Impedance values outside this range are generally specified for
special applications.

77
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

78

Chapter 3

Figure 3.1 Leakage field in a transformer

3.1 Reactance Calculation
3.1.1 Concentric primary and secondary windings
Transformer is a three-dimensional electromagnetic structure with the leakage
field appreciably different in the core window cross section (figure 3.1 (a)) as
compared to that in the cross section perpendicular to the window (figure 3.1 (b)).
For reactance ( impedance) calculations, however, values can be estimated
reasonably close to test values by considering only the window cross section. A
high level of accuracy of 3-D calculations may not be necessary since the
tolerance on reactance values is generally in the range of ±7.5% or ±10%.
For uniformly distributed ampere-turns along LV and HV windings (having
equal heights), the leakage field is predominantly axial, except at the winding
ends, where there is fringing (since the leakage flux finds a shorter path to return
via yoke or limb). The typical leakage field pattern shown in figure 3.1 (a) can be
replaced by parallel flux lines of equal length (height) as shown in figure 3.2 (a).
The equivalent height (Heq) is obtained by dividing winding height (Hw) by the
Rogowski factor KR (<1.0),

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

79

Figure 3.2 (a) Leakage field with equivalent height
(b) Magnetomotive force or flux density diagram

(3.1)
The leakage magnetomotive (mmf) distribution across the cross section of
windings is of trapezoidal form as shown in figure 3.2 (b). The mmf at any point
depends on the ampere-turns enclosed by a flux contour at that point; it increases
linearly with the ampere-turns from a value of zero at the inside diameter of LV
winding to the maximum value of one per-unit (total ampere-turns of LV or HV
winding) at the outside diameter. In the gap (Tg) between LV and HV windings,
since flux contour at any point encloses full LV (or HV) ampere-turns, the mmf is
of constant value. The mmf starts reducing linearly from the maximum value at
the inside diameter of the HV winding and approaches zero at its outside diameter.
The core is assumed to have infinite permeability requiring no magnetizing mmf,
and hence the primary and secondary mmfs exactly balance each other. The flux
density distribution is of the same form as that of the mmf distribution. Since the
core is assumed to have zero reluctance, no mmf is expended in the return path
through it for any contour of flux. Hence, for a closed contour of flux at a distance
x from the inside diameter of LV winding, it can be written that

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

80

Chapter 3

Figure 3.3 (a) Flux tube
(b) MMF diagram

(3.2)
or
(3.3)
For deriving the formula for reactance, let us derive a general expression for the
flux linkages of a flux tube having radial depth R and height Heq. The ampere-turns
enclosed by a flux contour at the inside diameter (ID) and outside diameter (OD)
of this flux tube are a(NI) and b(NI) respectively as shown in figure 3.3, where NI
are the rated ampere-turns. The general formulation is useful when a winding is
split radially into a number of sections separated by gaps. The r.m.s. value of flux
density at a distance x from the ID of this flux tube can now be inferred from
equation 3.3 as
(3.4)
The flux linkages of an incremental flux tube of width dx placed at x are
(3.5)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

81

where A is the area of flux tube given by
A=π(ID+2x)dx

(3.6)

Substituting equations 3.4 and 3.6 in equation 3.5,

(3.7)
Hence, the total flux linkages of the flux tube are given by
(3.8)
After integration and a few arithmetic operations, we get

(3.9)
The last term in square bracket can be neglected without introducing an
appreciable error to arrive at a simple formula for the regular design use.
(3.10)

The term

can be taken to be approximately equal to the mean diameter

(Dm) of the flux tube (for large diameters of windings/gaps with comparatively
lower values of their radial depths).
(3.11)
Now, let
(3.12)
which corresponds to the area of Ampere-Turn Diagram. The leakage inductance
of a transformer with n flux tubes can now be given as

(3.13)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

82

Chapter 3

and the corresponding expression for the leakage reactance X is

(3.14)
For the base impedance of Zb, the formula for percentage leakage reactance is

(3.15)

where V is rated voltage and term (V/N) is volts/turn of the transformer.
Substituting µ0=4π×10-7 and adjusting constants so that the dimensions used in the
formula are in units of centimeters (Heq in cm and

Σ ATD in cm ),
2

(3.16)
After having derived the general formula, we will now apply it for a simple case of
a two winding transformer shown in figure 3.2. The constants a and b have the
values of 0 and 1 for LV, 1 and 1 for gap, and 1 and 0 for HV respectively. If D1, Dg
and D2 are the mean diameters and T1, Tg and T2 are the radial depths of LV, gap
and HV respectively, using equation 3.12 we get
(3.17)
The value of Heq is calculated by equation 3.1, for which the Rogowski factor KR is
given by

(3.18)

For taking into account the effect of core, a more accurate but complex expression
for KR can be used as given in [1]. For most of the cases, equation 3.18 gives
sufficiently accurate results.
For an autotransformer, transformed ampere-turns should be used in equation
3.16 (difference between turns corresponding to HV and LV phase voltages
multiplied by HV current) and the calculated impedance is multiplied by the autofactor,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

83

(3.19)
where V LV and V HV are the rated line voltages of LV and HV windings
respectively.
3.1.2 Sandwich windings
The reactance formula derived in the previous section can also be used for
sandwich windings in core-type or shell-type transformers with slight
modifications. Figure 3.4 shows a configuration of such windings with two
sections. The mean diameter of windings is denoted by Dm. If there are total N
turns and S sections in windings, then remembering the fact that reactance is
proportional to the square of turns, the reactance between LV and HV windings
corresponding to any one section (having N/S turns) is given by
(3.20)
where

(3.21)
If the sections are connected in series, total reactance is S times that of one section,
(3.22)

Figure 3.4 Sandwich winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

84

Chapter 3

Figure 3.5 Unequal AT/m distribution

Similarly, if sections are connected in parallel, the formula can be derived by
taking number of turns in one section as N with current as I/S.
3.1.3 Concentric windings with non-uniform distribution of ampere
turns
Generally, on account of exclusion of tap winding turns at various tap positions,
we get different ampere-turn/height (AT/m) for LV and HV windings. This results
in a higher amount of radial flux at tapped out sections. When taps are in the main
body of a winding (no separate tap winding), it is preferable to put taps
symmetrically in the middle or at the ends to minimize the radial flux. If taps are
provided only at one end, the arrangement causes an appreciable asymmetry and
higher radial component of flux resulting into higher eddy losses and axial short
circuit forces. For different values of AT/m along the height of LV and HV
windings, the reactance can be calculated by resolving the AT distribution as
shown in figure 3.5. The effect of gap in the winding 2 can be accounted by
replacing it with the windings 3 and 4. The winding 3 has same AT/m distribution
as that of the winding 1, and the winding 4 has AT/m distribution such that the
addition of ampere-turns of the windings 3 and 4 along the height gives the same
ampere-turns as that of the winding 2. The total reactance is the sum of two
reactances; reactance between the windings 1 and 3 calculated by equation 3.16
and reactance of the winding 4 calculated by equation 3.22 (for sections
connected in series).
Since equation 3.22 always gives a finite positive value, a non-uniform AT
distribution (unequal AT/m of LV and HV windings) always results into higher
reactance. The increase in reactance can be indirectly explained by stating that the
effective height of windings in equation 3.16 is reduced if we take the average of
heights of the two windings. For example, if the tapped out section in one of the
windings is 5% of the total height at the tap position corresponding to the rated

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

85

voltage, the average height is reduced by 2.5%, giving the increase in reactance of
2.5% as compared to the case of uniform AT/m distribution.

3.2 Different Approaches for Reactance Calculation
The first approach for reactance calculation is based on the fundamental definition
of inductance in which inductance is defined as the ratio of total flux linkages to a
current which they link
(3.23)
and this approach has been used in Section 3.1 for finding the inductance and
reactance (equations 3.13 and 3.14).
In the second approach, use is made of an equivalent definition of inductance
from the energy point of view,
(3.24)
where Wm is energy in the magnetic field produced by a current I flowing in a
closed path. Now, we will see that the use of equation 3.24 leads us to the same
formula of reactance as given by equation 3.16.
Energy per unit volume in the magnetic field in air, with linear magnetic
characteristics (H=B/µ0), when the flux density is increased from 0 to B, is

(3.25)
Hence, the differential energy dWx for a cylindrical ring of height Heq, thickness dx
and diameter (ID+2x) is

(3.26)
Now the value of Bx can be substituted from equation 3.4 for the simple case of
flux tube with the conditions of a=0 and b=1 (with reference to figure 3.3).

(3.27)
For the winding configuration of figure 3.2, the total energy stored in LV winding
(with the term R replaced by the radial depth T1 of the LV winding) is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

86

Chapter 3

(3.28)

As seen in Section 3.1.1, the term in the brackets can be approximated as mean
diameter (D1) of the LV winding,

(3.29)
Similarly, the energy in HV winding can be calculated as
(3.30)
Since flux density is constant in the gap between the windings, energy in it can be
directly calculated as

(3.31)
(3.32)
Substituting the values of energies from equations 3.29, 3.30 and 3.32 in equation
3.24,

(3.33)

Σ

ATD as per equation 3.17, we see
If the term in the brackets is substituted by
that equation 3.33 derived for the leakage inductance from the energy view point
is the same as equation 3.13 calculated from the definition of flux linkages per
ampere.
In yet another approach, when numerical methods like Finite Element Method
are used, solution of the field is generally obtained in terms of magnetic vector
potential, and the inductance is obtained as
(3.34)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

87

where A is magnetic vector potential and J is current density vector. Equation 3.34
can be derived [2] from equation 3.24,

(3.35)
The leakage reactance between two windings of a transformer can also be
calculated by the equation,
X12=X1+X2-2M12

(3.36)

where X1 and X2 are the self reactances of the windings and M12 is the mutual
reactance between them. It is difficult to calculate or accurately test the self and
mutual reactances which depend on saturation effects. Also, since the values of
(X1+X2) and 2M12 are nearly equal and are very high as compared to the leakage
reactance X12, it is very difficult to calculate accurately the value of leakage
reactance as per equation 3.36. Hence, it is always easier to calculate the leakage
reactance of a transformer directly without using formulae involving self and
mutual reactances. Therefore, for finding the effective leakage reactance of a
system of windings, the total power of the system is expressed in terms of leakage
impedances instead of self and mutual impedances. Consider a system of
windings 1, 2, ——, n, with leakage impedances Zjk between pairs of windings j
and k. For a negligible magnetizing current (as compared to the rated currents in
the windings) the total power can be expressed as [3]
(3.37)
where
is the complex conjugate of
The resistances can be neglected in
comparison with much larger reactances. When current vectors of windings are
parallel (in phase or phase-opposition), the expression for Q (which is given by the
imaginary part of above equation) becomes

(3.38)
Equation 3.38 gives the total reactive volt-amperes consumed by all the leakage
reactances of the system of windings. The effective or equivalent leakage
reactance of the system of n windings, referred to source (primary) winding with
current Ip is given by
(3.39)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

88

Chapter 3

Figure 3.6 Method of images

If Xjk and currents are expressed in per-unit in equation 3.38, the value of Q
(calculated with rated current flowing in the primary winding) gives directly the
per-unit reactance of a transformer with n windings. Use of this reactive KVA
approach is illustrated in Sections 3.6 and 3.7.

3.3 Two-Dimensional Analytical Methods
The classical method described in Section 3.1 has certain limitations. The effect of
core is not taken into account. It is also tedious to take into account axial gaps in
windings and asymmetries in ampere-turn distribution. Some of the more
commonly used analytical methods, in which these difficulties are overcome, are
now described. The leakage reactance calculation by more accurate numerical
methods (e.g., Finite Element Method) is described in Section 3.4.
3.3.1 Method of images
When computers were not available, many attempts were made to devise accurate
methods of calculating axial and radial components of the leakage field, and
subsequently the reactance. One popular approach was to use simple Biot-Savart’s
law with the effect of iron core taken into account by method of images. The
method basically works in Cartesian (x–y) coordinate system in which windings
are represented by straight coils (assumed to be of infinite dimension along the z
axis perpendicular to plane of the paper) placed at an appropriate distance from a
plane surface bounding a semi-infinite mass of infinite permeability. The effect of
iron is represented by images of coils as far behind the surface as the coils are in
the front. Parallel planes have to be added to get accurate results as shown in figure
3.6, giving an arrangement of infinite number of images in all four directions [4].

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

89

The idea is that all these coils give the same value of leakage field at any point as
that with the original geometry of two windings enclosed in an iron boundary. A
new plane (mirror) can be added one at a time till the difference between the
results is less than the admissible value of error; generally the first three or four
images are sufficient. Biot-Savart’s law is then applied to this arrangement of
currents, which is devoid of magnetic mass (iron), to find the value of field at any
point.

3.3.2 Roth’s method
The method of field analysis by double Fourier series originally proposed by Roth
was extended in [5] to calculate the leakage reactance for irregular distribution of
windings. The advantage of this method is that it is applicable to uniform as well
as non-uniform ampere-turn distributions of windings. The arrangement of
windings in the core window may be entirely arbitrary but divisible into
rectangular blocks, each block having a uniform current density within itself.
In this method, the core window is considered as π radians wide and π radians
long, regardless of its absolute dimensions. The ampere-turn density distribution
as well as the flux distribution is conceived to be consisting of components
which vary harmonically along both the x and y axes. The method uses a similar
principle to that of the method of images; for every harmonic the maximum
occurs at fictitious planes about which mirroring is done to simulate the effect of
iron boundary. Reactive volt-amperes (I2X) are calculated in terms of these
current harmonics for a depth of unit dimension in the z direction. The total voltamperes are estimated by multiplying the obtained value by mean perimeter. The
per-unit value of reactance is calculated by dividing I2X by base volt-amperes.
For a reasonable accuracy, the number of space harmonics for double Fourier
series should be at least equal to 20 when the ampere-turn distribution is identical
in the LV and HV windings [6]. The accuracy is higher with the increase in
number of space harmonics. Figure 3.7 shows plots of radial flux density along
the height of a transformer winding having uniform ampere-turn distribution in
LV and HV windings. As the number of harmonics is increased, the variation of
radial flux density becomes smooth, indicating the higher accuracy of field
computations.

3.3.3 Rabin’s method
If the effect of winding curvature is required to be taken into account in the Roth’s
formulation, the method becomes complicated, and in that case Rabin’s method is
more suitable [4,7]. It solves the following Poisson’s equation in polar coordinates,
(3.40)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

90

Chapter 3

Figure 3.7 Radial flux density with increasing number of space harmonics

where A is magnetic vector potential and J is current density having only the
angular component. Therefore, in circular co-ordinates the equation becomes
(3.41)
In this method, the current density is assumed to depend only on the axial position
and hence can be represented by a single Fourier series with coefficients which are
Bessel and Struve functions. For reasonable accuracy, the number of space
harmonics should be about 70 [6].

3.4 Numerical Method for Reactance Calculation
Finite Element Method (FEM) is the most commonly used numerical method for
reactance calculation of non-standard winding configurations and asymmetrical/
non-uniform ampere-turn distributions, which cannot be easily and accurately
handled by the classical method given in Section 3.1. The FEM analysis can be
more accurate than the analytical methods described in Section 3.3. User-friendly
commercial FEM software packages are now available. Two-dimensional FEM
analysis can be integrated into routine design calculations. The main advantage of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

91

FEM is that any complex geometry can be analyzed since the FEM formulation
depends only on the class of problem and is independent of its geometry. It can
also take into account material discontinuities easily. The FEM formulation makes
use of the fact that Poisson’s partial-differential equation is satisfied when total
magnetic energy function is a minimum [8,9]. The problem geometry is divided
into small elements. Within each element, the flux density is assumed constant so
that the magnetic vector potential varies linearly within each element. For better
accuracy, the vector potential is assumed to vary as a polynomial of a degree
higher than one. The elements are generally of triangular or tetrahedral shape.
Windings are modeled as rectangular blocks. If ampere-turn distribution is not
uniform (different ampere-turn densities), the windings are divided into suitable
sections so that the ampere-turn distribution in each section is uniform. A typical
configuration of LV and HV windings in a transformer window is shown in figure
3.8. The main steps of analysis are now outlined below:
1. Creation of geometry: The geometry shown in figure 3.8 is quite simple. In
case of complex 2-D or 3-D geometries, many commercial FEM programs allow
importing of figures drawn in drafting packages, which makes it easier and less
time consuming to create a geometry. The geometry has to be always bounded by
a boundary like abcda shown in the figure. The two-dimensional problems can be
solved in either Cartesian or Axisymmetric coordinate systems. Since a
transformer is a three-dimensional electromagnetic structure, both the systems are
approximate but sufficiently accurate for magnetostatic problems such as
reactance estimation. In Axisymmetric (r-z) coordinate system, line ab represents
the axis (center-line) of the core and hence the horizontal distance between lines
ab and ef equals half the core diameter.

Figure 3.8 Geometry for FEM analysis

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

92

Chapter 3

2. Meshing: This step involves division of geometry into small elements. For most
accurate results, the element size should be as small as possible if flux density is
assumed constant in it. Thus, logically the element (mesh) size should be smaller
only in the regions where there is an appreciable variation in values of flux
density. Such an intelligent meshing reduces the number of elements and
computation time. An inexperienced person may not always know the regions
where the solution is changing appreciably; hence one can start with a very coarse
mesh, get a solution, and then refine the mesh in the regions where the solution is
changing rapidly. Ideally, one has to go on refining the mesh till there is no
appreciable change in the value of solution (flux density in this case) at any point
in the geometry. For the geometry of figure 3.8, the radial component of flux
density changes appreciably at the winding ends, necessitating the use of finer
mesh in these regions as shown in figure 3.9.
3. Material properties: Core is defined with relative permeability (µr) of some tens
of thousands. It really does not matter whether we define it as 10000 or 50000
because almost all the energy is stored in the non-magnetic regions (µr=1) outside
the core. While estimating the leakage reactance, ampere-turns of LV and HV are
assumed to be exactly equal and opposite (magnetizing ampere-turns are
neglected), and hence there is no mutual component of flux in the core (there is no
flux contour in the core enclosing both the windings). Other parts, including
windings, are defined with µr of 1. Here, the conductivity of winding material is
not defined since the effect of eddy currents in winding conductors on the leakage
field is usually neglected in reactance calculations (the problem is solved as a
magnetostatic problem). Individual conductor/turn may have to be modeled for
estimation of circulating currents in parallel strands of a winding, which is a
subject of discussion in Chapter 4.
4. Source definition: In this step, the ampere-turn density for each winding/
section (ampere-turns divided by cross-sectional area) is defined.

Figure 3.9 FEM mesh

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

93

5. Boundary conditions: There are two types of boundary conditions, viz.
Dirichlet and Neumann. The boundary conditions in which potential is prescribed
are called as Dirichlet conditions. In the present case, Dirichlet condition is
defined for the boundary abcda (flux lines are parallel to this boundary) with the
value of magnetic vector potential taken as zero for convenience. It should be
noted that a contour of equal values of magnetic vector potential is a flux line. The
boundary conditions on which the normal derivative of potential is prescribed are
called as Neumann conditions. The flux lines cross orthogonally (at 90° angle) at
these boundaries. A boundary on which the Dirichlet condition is not defined, the
Neumann condition gets automatically specified. If the core is not modeled, no
magnetic vector potential should be defined on the boundary efgh (iron-air
boundary). The flux lines then impinge on this boundary orthogonally, which is in
line with the valid assumption that the core is infinitely permeable. But in the
absence of core, one reference potential should be defined in the whole geometry
(usually at a point in the gap between windings along their center-line).
6. Solution: Matrix representation of each element, formation of global
coefficient matrix and imposition of boundary conditions are done in this step
(commercial FEM software does these things internally). Solution of resulting
simultaneous algebraic equations is subsequently obtained. Solution proceeds
broadly in the following way:
- approximation of magnetic vector potential A within each element in a
standardized fashion. For example in Cartesian coordinate system,
A=a+bx+cy

(3.42)

- the constants a, b, c can be expressed in terms of values of A at the nodes of an
element. The above expression then gives A over the entire element as linear
interpolation between the nodal values
- potential distributions in various elements are inter-related so as to constrain
the potential to be continuous across inter-element boundaries
- minimization of energy then determines the values of A at the nodes
7. Post-processing: Leakage field plot (like in figure 3.1) can be obtained and
studied. The total stored energy is calculated as per equation
(3.43)
If the problem is solved in Cartesian coordinate system, energy obtained is per
unit length in the z direction. In order to obtain the total energy, the value of energy
for each section of the geometry is multiplied by the corresponding mean
diameters. Finally, the leakage inductance can be calculated by equation 3.24.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

94

Chapter 3

Example 3.1
The relevant dimensions (in mm) of 31.5 MVA, 132/33 kV, 50 Hz, Yd1 transformer
are indicated in figure 3.10. The value of volts/turn is 76.21. The transformer is
having -0% to +10% taps on HV winding. It is having linear type of on-load tap
changer; there are 10% tapping turns placed symmetrically in the middle of HV
winding giving a total voltage variation of 10%. It is required to calculate the
leakage reactance of the transformer at the nominal tap position (corresponding to
HV voltage of 132 kV) by the classical method and FEM analysis.
Solution:
We will calculate the leakage reactance by method given in Section 3.1.3 as well
as by FEM analysis.
1. Classical method
At the nominal tap position, TAP winding has zero ampere-turns since all its turns
are cut out of the circuit. This results into unequal AT/m distribution between LV
and HV windings along their height.
The HV winding is replaced by a winding (HV1) with the uniformly distributed

ampere-turns (1000 turns distributed uniformly along the height of 1260 mm) and
a second winding (HV2) having ampere-turns distribution such that the
superimposition of ampere-turns of both these windings gives the ampere-turn
distribution of the original HV winding.
We will first calculate reactance between LV and HV1 windings by using the
formulation given in Section 3.1.
T1=7.0 cm, T2=5.0 cm, T3=10.0 cm, Hw=126.0 cm
Equations 3.18 and 3.1 give
KR=0.944 and Heq=HW/KR=126/0.944=133.4 cm
The term
is calculated as per equation 3.17,
Leakage reactance can be calculated from equation 3.16 as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

95

Figure 3.10 Details of transformer of Example 3.1

The winding HV2 is made up of two sections. The ampere-turn diagram for the top

section is shown in figure 3.10. The section has two windings, each having
ampere-turns of 0.05 per-unit [=(50×137.78)/(1000×137.78)]. For this section,
T1=56.7 cm, Tg=0.0 cm, T2=6.3 cm, Hw=10.0 cm
It is to be noted here that the winding height is actually the dimension in radial
direction, which is equal to 10.0 cm. Equations 3.18 and 3.1 give
KR=0.213 and Heq=HW/KR=10/0.213=47.0 cm
The term ATD is calculated for each part as per equation 3.12 with the
corresponding values of a and b, and the mean diameter of HV winding,
The leakage reactance of the section can be calculated from equation 3.16 as

The HV2 winding comprises of two such sections connected in series. Hence, the

total reactance contributed by HV2 is two times the reactance of one section as
explained in Section 3.1.2.
Therefore, the total reactance is,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

96

Chapter 3
X=XLV_HV1+XHV2=14.64+0.48=15.12%

2. FEM analysis
The analysis is done as per the steps outlined in Section 3.4. The winding to yoke
distance is 130 mm for this transformer. The stored energy in different parts of
geometry as given by the FEM analysis is:

LV
:
HV
:
HV center gap
:
Portion of whole geometry excluding LV and HV windings :

438 J
773 J
87 J
1205 J

The energy stored in the core is negligible. The total energy is 2503 J. Using
equation 3.24, the leakage inductance can be found as

The value of base impedance is

Thus, the values of leakage reactance given by the classical method and FEM
analysis are quite close.
Example 3.2
Calculate the leakage reactance of a transformer having 10800 ampere-turns in
each of the LV and HV windings. The rated voltage of LV is 415 volts and current
is 300 A. The two windings are sandwiched into 4 sections as shown in figure
3.11. The relevant dimensions (in mm) are given in the figure. The value of volts/
turn is 11.527. The mean diameter of windings is 470 mm.
Solution:
The leakage reactance will be calculated by the method given in Section 3.1.2 and
FEM analysis.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

97

Figure 3.11 Details of transformer with sandwiched windings

1. Classical method
The whole configuration consists of four sections, each having 1/4th part of both
the LV and HV windings. For any one section,
T1=2.2 cm, Tg=2.0 cm, T2=2.5 cm, Hw=9.0 cm
Equations 3.18 and 3.1 give
KR=0.767 and Heq=HW/KR=9/0.767=11.7 cm
The term

is (as per equation 3.17)

The leakage reactance between LV and HV windings can be calculated from
equation 3.22 with number of sections as S=4,

2. FEM analysis
The full geometry as given in figure 3.11 is modeled and the analysis is performed
as per the steps outlined in Section 3.4. The stored energy in the different parts of
the geometry is:

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

98

Chapter 3

The total energy is 8.36 J. Using equation 3.24, the leakage inductance can be
found to be

Base impedance is

3.5 Impedance Characteristics of Three-Winding
Transformer
A three-winding (three-circuit) transformer is generally required when actual
loads or auxiliary loads (reactive power compensating devices such as shunt
reactors or condensers) are required to be supplied at a voltage different from that
of either primary or secondary voltage. An unloaded tertiary winding is also used
just for the stabilizing purpose (which is discussed in Section 3.8). The
phenomena related to leakage field (efficiency, regulation, parallel operation and
short circuit currents) of a multi-circuit transformer cannot be analyzed in the
same way as that for a two-winding transformer. Each winding is interlinked with
the leakage fields of other windings, and hence a load current in one winding
affects voltages in other windings, sometimes in a surprising way. For example, a
lagging load on one winding may increase the voltage of other windings due to
negative leakage reactance (capacitive reactance).
The leakage reactance characteristics of a three-winding transformer can be
represented by the equivalent circuit method in which it is assumed that each
circuit has an individual leakage reactance. When the magnetizing current is
neglected (which is quite justified in the calculations related to leakage fields) and
if all the quantities are expressed in per-unit or percentage notation, magnetically
interlinked circuits of a three-winding transformer can be represented by
electrically interlinked circuits as shown in figure 3.12. The equivalent circuit can
be either star or mesh network. The star equivalent circuit is more commonly used
and is discussed here.
The percentage leakage reactances between pairs of windings can be expressed
in terms of their individual percentage leakage reactances (all expressed on
common volt-amperes base) as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

99

Figure 3.12 Representation of a three-winding transformer

X12=X1+X2

(3.44)

X23=X2+X3

(3.45)

X31=X1+X3

(3.46)

It follows from the above three equations that the individual reactances in the star
equivalent circuit are given by
(3.47)

(3.48)

(3.49)
A rigorous derivation for above three equations and evolution of the star
equivalent circuit is given in [10].
Similarly, percentage resistances can be derived as
(3.50)

(3.51)

(3.52)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

100

Chapter 3

Figure 3.13 Mutual effect in star equivalent network

It is to be noted that these percentage resistances represent the total load loss (DC
resistance I2R loss in windings, eddy loss in windings and stray losses in structural
parts).
The leakage reactances in the star equivalent network are basically the mutual
load reactances between different circuits. For example, the reactance X1 in figure
3.12 is the common or mutual reactance to loads in circuits 2 and 3. A current
flowing from circuit 1 to either 2 or 3, produces drop in R1 and X1, and hence
affects voltages of circuits 2 and 3. When a voltage is applied to winding 1 with
winding 2 short-circuited as shown in figure 3.13, the voltage across opencircuited winding 3 is equal to the voltage drop across the leakage impedance, Z2,
of circuit 2.
As said earlier, the individual leakage reactance of a winding may be negative.
The total leakage reactance between a pair of windings cannot be negative but
depending upon how the leakage field of one interlinks with the other, the mutual
effect between circuits may be negative when a load current flows [11]. Negative
impedances are virtual values, and they reproduce faithfully the terminal
characteristics of transformers and cannot be necessarily applied to internal
windings. Similarly, a negative resistance may appear in the star equivalent
network of an autotransformer with tertiary or of a high efficiency transformer
having stray losses quite high as compared to winding ohmic losses (e.g., when a
lower value of current density is used for windings).
In Chapter 1, we have seen how the regulation of a two-winding transformer is
calculated. Calculation of voltage regulation of a three-winding transformer is
explained with the help of following example.
Example 3.3
Find the regulation between terminals of a three-winding transformer, when the
load on IV winding is 70 MVA at power factor of 0.8 lagging and the load on LV
winding is 30 MVA at power factor of 0.6 lagging. The transformer data is:

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

101

Figure 3.14 Star-equivalent circuit and regulation of Example 3.3

Rating: 100/100/30 MVA, 220/66/11 kV
Results of load loss (short circuit) test referred to 100 MVA base:
HV-IV
HV-LV
IV-LV

: R1-2=0.30%, X1-2=15.0%
: R1-3=0.35%, X1-3=26.0%
: R2-3=0.325%, X2-3=10.5%

Solution:
The star equivalent circuit derived using equations 3.47 to 3.52 is shown in figure
3.14. It is to be noted that although HV, IV and LV windings are rated for different
MVA values, for finding the equivalent circuit, we have to work on a common
MVA base (in this case it is 100 MVA).
The IV winding is loaded to 70 MVA; let the constant K2 denote the ratio of
actual load to the base MVA,
K2=70/100=0.7
Similarly, for LV winding which is loaded to 30 MVA,
K3=30/100=0.3
The regulations for circuits 2 and 3 are calculated using equation 1.65,

ε2=K2(R2cosθ2+X2sinθ2)=0.7(0.1375×0.8+(-0.25)×0.6)=-0.03%
ε3=K3(R3cosθ3+X3sinθ3)=0.3(0.1875×0.6+10.75×0.8)=2.61%

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

102

Chapter 3

The effective power factor (cosθ1) and the effective load taken as a fraction of base
MVA (constant K1) for the primary (220 kV) circuit are found by solving the
following two equations:
K1 cosθ1=K2 cosθ2+K3 cosθ3=0.7×0.8+0.3×0.6=0.74

(3.53)

K1 sinθ1=K2 sinθ2+K3 sinθ3=0.7×0.6+0.3×0.8=0.66

(3.54)

Solving these two equations we get
K1=0.99, cosθ1=0.75, sinθ1=0.67
Therefore, the primary circuit regulation is

ε1=K1(R1 cosθ1+X1 sinθ1)=0.99(0.1625×0.75+15.25×0.67)=10.23%
Now, the regulation between terminals can be calculated as

ε1-2=ε1+ε2=10.23+(-0.03)=10.2%
ε1-3=ε1+ε3=10.23+2.61=12.84%
ε2-3=-ε2+ε3=0.03+2.61=2.64%
While calculating ε2-3, negative sign is taken for ε2 because the drop in voltage is in
direction opposite to the direction of flow of current.
When there are more than three windings (circuits), transformers cannot be in
general represented by a pure star or mesh equivalent circuit. The equivalent
circuit should have n(n-1)/2 independent impedance links, where n is the number
of circuits. A four-winding transformer has six independent links with four
terminal points. The procedures for determination of the values of equivalent
network impedances for transformers with four or more independent circuits are
given in [1,12,13].

Figure 3.15 Zigzag transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

103

Figure 3.16 Vector diagram of delta-zigzag transformer

3.6 Reactance Calculation for Zigzag Transformer
A connection diagram of zigzag transformer, in which windings on different limbs
(in a 3-phase 3-limb construction) are cross-connected, is shown in figure 3.15. It
is termed as zigzag or interconnected star winding because the zig winding of one
phase is connected in series with the zag winding of one of the other two phases.
The vector diagram for a delta-zigzag transformer is shown in figure 3.16. The
interconnection of windings of different phases introduces 30° (or 150°) phaseshift between zig (or zag) winding and the corresponding line-to-neutral voltage
The zig and zag windings have 15.47% more turns as
compared to conventional windings to get the same magnitude of phase/line
voltages. Hence, the zigzag transformer is costlier than the conventional
transformer, but its use is essential in some cases. Its main characteristics and uses
are as follows:
1) It can be used as an earthing transformer in a delta connected system or an
ungrounded star connected system, wherein neutral is not available for earthing/
grounding. Consider a zigzag transformer connected to a delta connected source
as shown in figure 3.17. The zigzag transformer provides neutral for the
grounding purpose. For a single line-to-ground fault, zero-sequence current flows
in the ground circuit allowing the protection system to act. The voltages of other
two healthy line terminals are maintained at their respective line-to-neutral
voltage levels. In absence of the grounded neutral, voltages of healthy phases
would increase to line-to-line voltage level, stressing the insulation of connected
equipment. Thus, zigzag earthing transformer not only helps in protection but also
reduces the voltage stresses under asymmetrical fault conditions.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

104

Chapter 3

Figure 3.17 Zigzag earthing transformer

2) A zigzag transformer has a specific advantage when used in an application
involving power electronic converters. The DC magnetization, as a result of
asymmetry in firing angles, gets cancelled in each limb due to opposite directions
of DC magnetizing component of currents flowing in the two windings on the
same limb. Similarly, DC magnetization inherent in a 3-pulse mid-point rectifier
connection is eliminated if the secondary is a zigzag winding [14].
3) The earthing transformer offers a low impedance path to the zero-sequence
currents under fault conditions because the only magnetic flux which results from
zero-sequence currents is the leakage flux around each winding section (the flux
in a limb is zero due to opposite directions of equal currents flowing in the two
windings wound on it as shown in figure 3.17). Owing to a very small impedance
of the earthing transformer under fault conditions, it may be necessary to limit the
value of fault current by connecting a resistor of suitable value between the neutral
and earth. Under normal operating conditions, only a small exciting current
circulates in the windings of the earthing transformer.
4) Third harmonic voltage components present in zig and zag windings get
cancelled in the lines.
The reactance of a transformer consisting of zigzag and star (or delta) windings
can be calculated from reactive volt-amperes. Consider a star-zigzag transformer
shown in figure 3.18. The directions of currents Ia, Ib and Ic are shown in the figure
as per convenience of three-phase system (all currents flowing towards neutral).
The corresponding vector diagram is also shown in the figure.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

105

Figure 3.18 Reactance calculation of a transformer having zigzag winding

All the currents are resolved into two mutually perpendicular sets of components.
Since the vector sum of all ampere-turns is zero on each limb, sum of all
components indicated by prime is zero and sum of all components indicated by
double prime is also zero. The phase A current of the star connected winding (IA) is
taken as the reference vector, and all the other currents are resolved in the
directions along and perpendicular to this vector. Since IA is taken as the reference
vector, in p.u. notations and
have values of 1 p.u. and 0 p.u. respectively.
Vectors of zigzag winding currents of phases a and c are shown in the vector
diagram. Current Ia_zig is in phase with Ia and current Ia_zag is in phase with Ic. The
zig and zag windings have 0.577 p.u. ampere-turns (1.1547×0.5). Also, the
currents Ia and Ic are at an angle of 30° with respect to the reference vector. The
direction of current Ic (Ia_zag) has been reversed in the vector diagram so that at any
instant the corresponding ampere-turns of the zag winding oppose that of the star
winding. Thus, we can write
(3.55)
(3.56)
(3.57)
(3.58)
The equations 3.55 to 3.58 satisfy the following two equations as required by the
condition that the vector sum of all ampere-turns on the limb corresponding to
phase A is zero,
(3.59)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

106

Chapter 3
(3.60)

The expression for Q can be generalized using equation 3.37 for the case where
the current vectors of windings are not parallel (not in phase or phase-opposition)
by resolving them into two mutually perpendicular sets. The resistances are
neglected since they are much smaller than the reactances. The value of Q is
calculated separately for each set and the two values are added algebraically,

(3.61)
The value of Q for the phase A having three windings, viz. star, zig, and zag, which
are now denoted by numbers 1, 2, and 3, respectively, is

(3.62)

where X 12, X 13 , and X 23 are the per-unit leakage reactances between the
corresponding windings. Substituting the values of all currents from equations
3.55 to 3.58, and remembering that I1=IA, I2=Ia_ zig and I3=Ia_zag,

(3.63)
Since the currents and reactances are expressed in per-unit notation, the value of Q
directly gives the per-unit reactance of star-zigzag windings.
(3.64)
Thus, the leakage reactance of a transformer with the star (or delta) and zigzag
connected windings can be computed easily, once the leakage reactances between
the pairs of windings are calculated on a common volt-amperes base.
Example 3.4
Find the leakage reactance of 31.5 MVA, 132/11 kV, 50 Hz, star/zigzag
transformer whose various relevant dimensions (in mm) are indicated in figure
3.19. Value of volts/turn is 76.39.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

107

Figure 3.19 Dimensions of star-zigzag transformer

Solution:
Let us first calculate the leakage reactances between pairs of windings, viz. zig—
zag, zig—HV and zag—HV by the procedure given in Section 3.1.1 for the
concentric windings.
Reactance between zig and zag:
T1=4.0 cm, Tg=1.8 cm, T2=4.0 cm, Hw=125.0 cm
Equations 3.18 and 3.1 give: KR=0.975 and Heq=125/0.975=128.2 cm
Equation 3.17 gives

All the three reactance values need to be calculated on a common MVA base. The
value of base MVA is taken as 31.5 MVA. The corresponding current and turns of
HV side are used in the reactance formula.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

108

Chapter 3

The leakage reactance is calculated from equation 3.16 as

Similarly, other two reactances can be calculated:
Reactance between zig and HV:
T1=4 cm, T2=10.8 cm, T3=10 cm

Reactance between zag and HV:
T1=4 cm, T2=5 cm, T3=10 cm

By using equation 3.64, we get reactance between star and zigzag windings as

3.7 Zero-Sequence Reactance Estimation
The method of symmetrical components is commonly used in power system
analysis. Unlike rotating machines, for a static apparatus like a transformer,
positive-sequence and negative-sequence impedances ( reactances) are equal.
Under symmetrical loading conditions, only positive-sequence reactances need to
be considered. In case of asymmetrical loading/disturbances or single-phase
faults, the system response is largely decided by the zero-sequence reactances of
the network. It is comparatively easy to understand and calculate positivesequence reactances. The zero-sequence reactance of a transformer may differ
considerably from its positive-sequence reactance depending upon the type of
magnetic circuit and winding connections.
In order to measure the zero-sequence reactance, a voltage is applied between
the shorted line terminals of a star connected winding and neutral as shown in
figure 3.20. Since the zero-sequence currents cannot exist in the line terminals
connected to a delta winding, its zero-sequence reactance is infinitely large,
except for a large capacitive reactance. With reference to the test arrangement of
figure 3.20, the zero-sequence reactance ( impedance) of a star connected
winding with the grounded neutral is calculated as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

109

Figure 3.20 Measurement of zero-sequence impedance

(3.65)
There are basically two types of zero-sequence reactances for a winding:
1. Open circuit (magnetizing) reactance (with terminals of all other windings kept
open-circuited)
2. Short circuit (leakage) reactance (with terminals of only one other winding
short-circuited)
The significance of these two types of zero-sequence reactances and methods for
their estimation are now discussed.
3.7.1 Open circuit zero-sequence reactance without delta connected
winding
A. Three-phase three-limb transformers
For a three-phase three-limb core, since fluxes in three limbs are in the same
direction, they have to return through a path outside the core. In this case, tank acts
as an equivalent delta winding, and the magnetizing zero-sequence reactance is
the reactance between the tank and excited winding. Since the gap/area between
the excited winding and tank is much larger than the gap/area between the
windings, the magnetizing zero-sequence reactance is considerably higher than
the positive-sequence leakage reactance. The tank influences the zero-sequence
reactance in the following way. It provides a comparatively lower reluctance
return path (as compared to air) to the zero-sequence flux, which has the effect of
increasing the reactance; on the other hand the tank enclosing three phases acts as
a short-circuited winding reducing the reactance. The latter effect is more

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

110

Chapter 3

dominant and hence the zero-sequence reactance inside a tank is appreciably less
than that without it [15].
The reactance between the excited winding and tank can be calculated by the
methodology given in Section 3.1.1 with the tank represented as an equivalent
(fictitious) winding with zero radial depth (contribution of tank to the ampere-turn
diagram area can be neglected due to its small thickness). The distance between
the excited winding and tank can be taken as average equivalent distance which
gives approximately the same area of space between them. Thus, in this case the
zero-sequence reactance can be calculated by using equation 3.16 as

(3.66)
where
Tw=radial depth of excited winding in cm
Dw=mean diameter of excited winding in cm
Tg=gap between excited winding and tank in cm
Dg=mean diameter of gap between excited winding and tank in cm
A sufficient voltage should be applied during the test so that the tank, which is
generally made of mild steel material, is in saturated condition (due to flux
passing through it). If the test is done at a voltage which does not saturate the tank,
its higher permeability will increase the reactance. Hence, the reactance
calculated as per equation 3.66 has to be suitably corrected by an empirical factor
which can be derived based on the measurements done at various voltage levels.
The correction factor depends on the applied voltage as shown in figure 3.21 [16]
and it is a function of permeability value. The curve has the same nature as that of
permeability versus magnetic field intensity graph derived by measurements [17]
on a typical grade of mild steel material (figure 3.22).

Figure 3.21 Correction factor for zero-sequence reactance [16]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

111

Figure 3.22 Variation of µr with field intensity in mild steel material [17]

B. Three-phase five-limb and single-phase three-limb transformers
In a three-phase five-limb core, the zero-sequence flux has a return path through
the end yokes and end limbs and hence the zero-sequence magnetizing reactance
has the same value as the corresponding positive-sequence magnetizing reactance
(quite a high value) unless the voltage applied is such that yokes and end limbs
saturate. For an applied value of zero-sequence voltage, close to the rated voltage,
yokes and end limbs will get completely saturated (area of yokes and end limbs
are too less to carry the zero-sequence flux of all the three phases at the rated
voltage) giving a lower value of magnetizing zero-sequence reactance close to that
of a transformer with three-phase three-limb core.
For single-phase three-limb cores, since the zero-sequence flux has a return
path through end limbs, the zero-sequence magnetizing reactance is equal to the
positive-sequence magnetizing reactance (~infinite value). Thus, for a three-phase
bank of single-phase transformers, the zero-sequence reactance for any type
connection is usually equal to the positive-sequence reactance [18].
3.7.2 Open circuit zero-sequence reactance with delta connected
winding
With one delta connected secondary winding, a current flows in the delta winding.
Thus, the transformer acts as if it is short-circuited regardless of whether the
winding is loaded or not. Let us again consider following two cases:
A. Three-phase three-limb transformers
In this case, when zero-sequence voltage is applied to a star connected winding,
currents flow in the delta connected winding and the tank (which acts as an
equivalent delta winding). In order to estimate the current division between these
two delta windings and the value of zero-sequence reactance, we will use the
general method of finding reactance for a composite system of windings

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

112

Chapter 3

explained in the Section 3.2. Let the star connected primary winding, delta
connected secondary winding and the equivalent delta winding (tank) be
represented by notations 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Using equation 3.38, for the
present case of 3 windings (one star and two delta connected windings), the perunit value of zero-sequence reactance is
(3.67)
The currents in windings 2 and 3 are assigned with negative sign as their direction
is opposite to that in the primary winding. Since the magnetizing current can be
neglected,
I1=I2+I3

(3.68)

If the magnitude of applied zero-sequence voltage is such that the rated current
flows in the star connected primary winding (I1 has a value of 1 per-unit), then
I3=1-I2

(3.69)
(3.70)

The currents get distributed in the windings in such a way that the total energy is
minimized. Hence, differentiating Q with respect to current I2 and equating it to
zero, we get
(3.71)

(3.72)
The above value of I2 when substituted in equation 3.69 gives the tank current as
(3.73)
The delta connected secondary winding can be either inner or outer winding.
If delta connected winding (2) is outer winding:
(3.74)
Substituting the value of X13 in equations 3.72 and 3.73, we get
(3.75)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

113

Substituting these values of I2 and I3 in equation 3.70, the value of zero-sequence
reactance can be obtained as
(3.76)
Thus, with the outer delta winding, the zero-sequence reactance is approximately
equal to the positive-sequence leakage reactance (X12); this is an expected result
since the outer delta winding acts effectively as a shield and no current flows in the
tank (the outer delta winding almost entirely shields the tank).
If delta connected winding (2) is inner winding:
(3.77)
Substituting this value of X23 in equations 3.72 and 3.73, we get
(3.78)
Substituting these values of I2 and I3 in equation 3.70,
(3.79)
Thus, with an inner delta winding, the zero-sequence reactance is always less than
the positive-sequence leakage reactance (X12). This is due to the fact that in this
case X23>X13 (outer star connected winding 1 is closer to the tank).
It is to be noted that equations 3.74 and 3.77 are approximately valid; for
accurate calculations, expressions for I2 and I3 given by equations 3.72 and 3.73
should be directly substituted in equation 3.70.
B. Three-phase five-limb and single-phase three-limb transformers
For a transformer with three-phase five-limb core, the value of zero-sequence
reactance is equal to that of positive-sequence leakage reactance between the
windings until the applied voltage saturates the yokes and end limbs. At such a
high applied voltage, it acts as a three-limb transformer, and the zero-sequence
reactance can be calculated accordingly.
For a single-phase three-limb core, the zero-sequence reactance is equal to the
positive-sequence leakage reactance between star and delta connected windings,
since current can flow in the closed delta (as if short-circuited) and there is a path
available for flux in the magnetic circuit.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

114

Chapter 3

Figure 3.23 Dimensions of 2 MVA transformer

Example 3.5
Calculate the positive-sequence and zero-sequence reactances of a 2 MVA, 11/
0.433 kV, 50 Hz, Dyn11 transformer whose various relevant dimensions in mm
are indicated in figure 3.23. The value of volts/turn is 15.625.
Solution:
Positive-sequence leakage reactance is calculated by the procedure given in
Section 3.1.1 for concentric windings.
The Rogowski factor is calculated by equation 3.18 as

Equivalent winding height as per equation 3.1 is
Heq=Hw/KR=60/0.955=62.8
The term

is calculated as per equation 3.17,

For calculating the reactance, either LV or HV ampere-turns are taken (values of
which are equal since the magnetizing ampere-turns are neglected).

The positive-sequence leakage reactance is given by equation 3.16,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

115

Since the delta connected HV winding is the outer winding, the zero-sequence
reactance of star connected winding is approximately equal to the positivesequence leakage reactance as explained in Section 3.7.2. However, during the
actual test, one usually gets the value of zero-sequence reactance higher than the
positive-sequence leakage reactance by an amount corresponding to the voltage
drop in the neutral bar. The reactance of a neutral bar of rectangular dimensions
(a×b) is given by the expression [19,20]:
(3.80)
where
Lb=length of bus-bar in cm
Ds=geometric mean distance from itself=0.2235×(a+b) cm
If the neutral bus-bar dimensions are: a=5 cm and b=0.6 cm, with a length of 50
cm,
Ds=0.2235×(5+0.6)=1.2516

The base impedance on LV side is

Since the current flowing in the neutral bar is 3 times that in the phase, the neutral
bar contributes 3 times the value of Xn in the zero-sequence reactance.

Hence, the measured zero-sequence reactance will test close to
(X0)actual=7.9+0.34=8.24%
3.7.3 Short circuit zero-sequence reactance
Zero-sequence reactance under short circuit is applicable, for example, when a star
connected secondary winding is short-circuited.
A. Three-phase three-limb transformers
The procedure for calculation of short circuit zero-sequence reactance of a threephase three-limb transformer is now explained with the help of an example.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

116

Chapter 3

Figure 3.24 Dimensions of transformer in Example 3.6

Example 3.6
The relevant dimensions (in mm) are given in figure 3.24 for a 31.5 MVA, 132/33
kV, 50 Hz, YNyn transformer. The volts/turn is 83.93. Calculate the zero-sequence
reactance of LV and HV windings and the parameters of the zero-sequence
network.
Solution:
The value of positive-sequence leakage reactance can be calculated in line with
previous examples as 12.16%. Let the inner 33 kV winding and outer 132 kV
winding be denoted by numbers 1 and 2 respectively.
Xp=(Xp)12=(Xp)21=12.16%
The open circuit zero-sequence reactance of LV and HV windings can be
calculated by the procedure given in Section 3.7.1 (and equation 3.66) with the
average LV to tank and HV to tank distances of 400 mm and 250 mm (for this
transformer) respectively.
T1=7 cm, Tg=40 cm, T2≈0, Hw=125 cm, KR=0.88, Heq=142 cm
HV current= 137.78 A

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

117

Similarly,

The zero-sequence reactance of the inner LV winding with the short-circuited
outer HV winding is same as the positive-sequence leakage reactance (if the
reactance contributed by neutral bar is neglected),
(Xz)12_sc=Xp=12.16%
Zero-sequence reactance of HV winding with short-circuited LV winding is given
as per equation 3.79,

The zero-sequence network [18] of this two winding transformer is shown in figure
3.25 which satisfies all the calculated zero-sequence reactance values, viz.
(Xz)1_oc, (Xz)2_oc, (Xz)12_sc and (Xz)21_sc
For example, the zero-sequence reactance with HV as the excited winding and LV
as the short-circuited winding is

which matches the value calculated previously.
In a similar way, the zero-sequence reactance of a three-winding three-phase
three-limb transformer can be estimated as shown by the following example.

Figure 3.25 Zero-sequence network of two-winding transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

118

Chapter 3

Figure 3.26 Dimensions of the 100 MVA transformer in Example 3.7

Example 3.7
The relevant dimensions (in mm) of 100 MVA, 220/66/11 kV, 50 Hz, YNynd1
transformer are given in figure 3.26. The volts/turn is 160. Calculate the zerosequence reactance of HV winding with LV short-circuited (and tertiary delta
closed).
Solution:
Let tertiary (11 kV), LV (66 kV) and HV (220 kV) be denoted by numbers 1, 2,
and 3 respectively. The values of positive-sequence leakage reactances for three
pairs of windings are calculated as:
(Xp)12=6.0%, (Xp)23=14.6%, (Xp)13=22.64%
Open circuit zero-sequence reactances of tertiary, LV and HV windings with
average distance between HV and tank of 250 mm are calculated as
(Xz)1_oc=64.81%
(Xz)2_oc=57.71%
(Xz)3_oc=40.93%
The various zero-sequence reactances between pairs of windings can be
calculated as per equation 3.79 as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

119

1. Zero-sequence voltage applied to HV, with LV open-circuited and tertiary delta
closed

2. Zero-sequence voltage applied to LV, with HV open-circuited and tertiary delta
closed

3. Zero-sequence voltage applied to HV, tertiary delta open and LV shortcircuited

Individual zero-sequence reactance of windings can be calculated by using
equations given in Section 3.5 as

The zero-sequence star equivalent network of the three-winding transformer is
shown in figure 3.27. The zero-sequence reactance of HV with LV short-circuited
(and tertiary delta closed) can be found as
(Xz)3_21=9.66+(0.7//4.64)=10.27%

Figure 3.27 Zero-sequence star equivalent circuit of three-winding transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

120

Chapter 3

Here, the system of four windings (tertiary, LV, HV and tank) is converted into an
equivalent three-winding system by taking into account the effect of the tank
while calculating short circuit zero-sequence reactance between any two of the
three windings. Hence, the calculation of (Xz)3_21 by the star equivalent circuit of
figure 3.27 is an approximate way. Actually the problem needs to be solved with
an additional equivalent delta winding.
Let us now calculate the reactance by more accurate and logical method in
which the tank is treated as the 4th winding. The accurate value of zero-sequence
reactance can be calculated by the procedure given in Section 3.2 (i.e., reactive
kVA approach). Let I1, I2 and I4 be the currents flowing through the tertiary, LV
and equivalent delta (tank) windings respectively. The current flowing through the
HV winding (I3) is 1 per-unit and we know that
I3=1=I1+I2+I4
The expression for Q is

The reactance between the tank and any other winding has already been
calculated (e.g., (Xp)14=(Xz)1_oc=64.81 %). By putting the values of all reactances
and using I1=1-I2-I4, the above expression becomes

Differentiating the above expression with respect to I2 and I4, and equating it to
zero, we get two simultaneous equations. These two equations are solved to get
I2=0.8747 and I4=0.2705
By putting the values of I2 and I4 in the expression for Q, we get directly the zerosequence reactance of HV with LV short-circuited (and tertiary delta closed) as
(Xz)3-21=10.21%, which is close to that calculated by the approximate method
using the star equivalent circuit (i.e., 10.27%).
The methods described for calculation of zero-sequence reactance can give
reasonably accurate results and should be refined by empirical correction factors
based on results of tests conducted on a number of transformers. For more
accurate calculations, numerical methods like Finite Element Method can be used
[21,22] in which the effect of the level of tank saturation on the zero-sequence
reactance can be exactly simulated. The tank material can be modeled in FEM
formulation by defining its conductivity and non-linear B-H characteristics. In

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

121

power transformers, tank shunts of CRGO material are commonly put on the inner
tank wall to reduce stray losses due to the leakage field. These shunts provide a
low reluctance path to the zero-sequence flux reducing the effect of the tank. As
explained earlier, the tank acts as an equivalent delta winding reducing the zerosequence reactance. The placement of magnetic shunts on the tank wall has the
effect of increasing the zero-sequence reactance. In such cases, FEM analysis is
essential for correct estimation of the reactance.
B. Three-phase five-limb and single-phase three-limb transformers
Since short circuit reactances are much smaller than open circuit reactances, zerosequence voltage applied to circulate rated currents is usually much smaller than
the rated voltage. Hence, in case of three-phase five-limb cores, yokes and end
limbs (which provide the path for zero-sequence flux) do not saturate. Therefore,
there will not be any currents in tank since all the flux is contained within the core.
Hence, the short circuit zero-sequence reactance is equal to the positive-sequence
leakage reactance in three-phase five-limb transformers.
In a single-phase three-limb transformer, yokes and end limbs provide a path
for zero-sequence flux and hence the zero-sequence leakage reactance is equal to
the positive-sequence leakage reactance.
The same inferences can be arrived at by analysis of the zero-sequence network
(see figure 3.25). The shunt branch reactance is very high (~infinity) due to low
reluctance path of end limbs in single-phase three-limb and three-phase five-limb
transformers (the shunt branch now represents the equivalent magnetizing
reactance in place of the reactance representing equivalent short-circuited tank
winding). This makes the zero-sequence reactance equal to the corresponding
positive-sequence short circuit (leakage) reactance with HV excited and LV shortcircuited (or with LV excited and HV short-circuited).

3.8 Stabilizing Tertiary Winding
As mentioned earlier, in addition to primary and secondary windings (both of
which are star or auto-star connected), transformers are sometimes provided with
tertiary winding. It can be used for the following purposes:
1) Static capacitors or synchronous condensers can be connected to the tertiary
winding for the injection of reactive power into a system for maintaining voltage
within certain limits.
2) Auxiliary equipment in a substation can be supplied at a voltage which is
different and lower than that of primary and secondary windings.
3) Three windings may be required for interconnecting three transmission lines at
three different voltages.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

122

Chapter 3

Figure 3.28 Unbalanced load

In all the above cases, the tertiary winding is loaded. In some applications, delta
connected tertiary winding is not loaded, in which case it is called as stabilizing
winding. The functions of the stabilizing winding are:
1) Third harmonic magnetizing currents flow in closed delta, making induced
voltages and core flux almost sinusoidal (refer to Section 2.8 of Chapter 2).
2) It stabilizes the neutral point; the zero-sequence impedance is lower and an
unbalanced load can be taken without undue unbalancing of phase voltages. When
an unloaded tertiary winding is provided to stabilize the neutral under
asymmetrical loading conditions, the currents flow in such a way that there is
ampere-turn balance between the three windings as shown for the case of singlephase loading in figure 3.28. The load in each phase of tertiary is equal to onethird of the single-phase (unbalanced) load. Hence, the rating of tertiary windings
is usually one-third that of the main windings.
3) It can prevent interference in telephone lines caused by third harmonic currents
and voltages in the lines and earth circuits.
In the previous section, we have seen that the zero-sequence characteristics of
three-phase three-limb and three-phase five-limb/bank of single-phase
transformers are different. The magnetic circuit of three-phase three-limb type can
be considered as open circuit offering a high reluctance to the zero-sequence flux,
and hence a lower zero-sequence reactance is obtained. On the other hand, for
three-phase five-limb/bank of single-phase transformers, the magnetic circuit can
be visualized as a closed one giving a very high value of the zero-sequence
reactance. If a delta connected stabilizing winding is added to these three types of
transformers (three-phase three-limb transformers, a bank of single-phase threelimb transformers, and three-phase five-limb transformers), the difference
between zero-sequence reactance characteristics of three-phase three-limb
transformers and that of the other two types diminishes. As long as one delta
connected winding is present, it makes a very little difference whether it is an
effectively open or closed magnetic circuit from the zero-sequence reactance
point of view.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

123

A frequently asked question is whether stabilizing windings can be dispensed
with for three-phase three-limb star-star (or auto-star) connected transformers
with grounded neutrals. This is because as seen in the previous section, the high
reluctance path and presence of tank (as an equivalent one turn delta connected
winding) together give a lower zero-sequence reactance compared to the positivesequence reactance, and thus to some extent the effect of stabilizing winding is
achieved. Whether or not the stabilizing winding can be omitted depends mainly
on whether zero-sequence and third harmonic characteristics are compatible with
the system into which the transformer is going to be installed. If these two
characteristics are not adversely affected in absence of the stabilizing winding, it
may be omitted [23]. Developments in power systems have led to more balanced
loads. Also if the telephone-interference problem due to harmonic currents is
within limits and if the zero-sequence currents during asymmetrical fault
conditions are large enough to be easily detected, the provision of stabilizing
winding in three-phase three-limb transformers should be critically reviewed.
This is because, since the stabilizing winding is generally unloaded, its conductor
dimensions tend to be designed smaller. Such a winding becomes quite weak and
vulnerable under asymmetrical fault conditions, which is a subject of discussion
in Chapter 6.
Consequences of omitting the stabilizing winding in bank of single-phase
transformers/three-phase five-limb transformers are significant. The zerosequence reactance will be higher, and if the disadvantages of high zero-sequence
reactance are not tolerable, the stabilizing winding cannot be omitted. For very
large transformers, a low voltage stabilizing winding with its terminal brought out
helps in carrying out tests such as no-load loss test at the manufacturer’s works. In
the absence of this winding, it may not be possible to do the no-load loss test if
the manufacturer does not have a high voltage source or a suitable stepup transformer. Alternatively, a star connected auxiliary winding can be provided
for testing purposes, whose terminals can be buried inside the tank after
testing.

References
1. Blume, L.F., Boyajian, A., Camilli, G., Lennox, T.C., Minneci, S., and
Montsinger, V.M. Transformer engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York,
and Chapman and Hall, London, 1951.
2. Hayt, W.H. Engineering electromagnetics, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Singapore, 1989, pp. 298–301.
3. Garin, A.N. and Paluev, K.K. Transformer circuit impedance calculations,
AIEE Transactions—Electrical Engineering, June 1936, pp. 717–729.
4. Waters, M. The short circuit strength of power transformers, Macdonald, London, 1966, pp. 24–25, p. 53.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

124

Chapter 3

5. Boyajian, A. Leakage reactance of irregular distributions of transformer windings by method of double Fourier series, AIEE Transactions—Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 73, Pt. III-B, 1954, pp. 1078–1086.
6. Sollergren, B. Calculation of short circuit forces in transformers, Electra, Report no. 67, 1979, pp. 29–75.
7. Rabins, L. Transformer reactance calculations with digital computers, AIEE
Transactions—Communications and Electronics, Vol. 75, Pt. I, 1956, pp. 261–
267.
8. Silvester, P.P. and Ferrari, R.L. Finite elements for electrical engineers, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1990.
9. Andersen, O.W. Transformer leakage flux program based on Finite Element
Method, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-92,
1973, pp. 682–689.
10. Rothe, P.S. An introduction to power system analysis, John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 1953, pp. 45–50.
11. Boyajian, A. Theory of three-circuit transformers, AIEE Transactions, February 1924, pp. 508–528.
12. Starr, F.M. An equivalent circuit for the four-winding transformer, General
Electric Review, Vol. 36, No. 3, March 1933, pp. 150–152.
13. Aicher, L.C. A useful equivalent circuit for a five-winding transformer, AIEE
Transactions—Electrical Engineering, Vol. 62, February 1943, pp. 66–70.
14. Schaefer, J. Rectifier circuits: theory and design, John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 1965, pp. 12–19.
15. Christoffel, M. Zero-sequence reactances of transformers and reactors, The
Brown Boveri Review, Vol. 52, No. 11/12, November/December 1965, pp.
837- 842.
16. Clarke E. Circuit analysis of AC power systems, Vol. II, John Wiley and Sons,
New York, Chapman and Hall, London, 1957, p. 153.
17. Jha, S.K. Evaluation and mitigation of stray losses due to high current leads
in transformers, M. Tech Dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering,
IIT-Bombay, India, 1995.
18. Garin, A.N. Zero phase sequence characteristics of transformers, General Electric Review, Vol. 43, No. 3, March 1940, pp. 131–136.
19. Copper Development Association, Copper for busbars, Publication No. 22,
January 1996, p. 53.
20. Schurig, O.R. Engineering calculation of inductance and reactance for rectangular bar conductors, General Electric Review, Vol. 36, No. 5, May 1933,
pp. 228–231.
21. Allcock, R., Holland, S., and Haydock, L. Calculation of zero phase sequence
impedance for power transformers using numerical methods, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 31, No. 3, May 1995, pp. 2048–2051.
22. Ngnegueu, T., Mailhot, M., Munar, A., and Sacotte, M. Zero phase sequence
impedance and tank heating model for three-phase three-leg core type power

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Impedance Characteristics

125

transformers coupling magnetic field and electric circuit equations in a Finite
Element software, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 31, No. 3, May 1995,
pp. 2068–2071.
23. Cogbill, B.A. Are stabilizing windings necessary in all Y-connected transformers, AIEE Transactions—Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 78, Pt. 3,
1959, pp. 963–970.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

4
Eddy Currents and Winding Stray
Losses

The load loss of a transformer consists of losses due to ohmic resistance of
windings (I2R losses) and some additional losses. These additional losses are
generally known as stray losses, which occur due to leakage field of windings and
field of high current carrying leads/bus-bars. The stray losses in the windings are
further classified as eddy loss and circulating current loss. The other stray losses
occur in structural steel parts. There is always some amount of leakage field in all
types of transformers, and in large power transformers (limited in size due to
transport and space restrictions) the stray field strength increases with growing
rating much faster than in smaller transformers. The stray flux impinging on
conducting parts (winding conductors and structural components) gives rise to
eddy currents in them. The stray losses in windings can be substantially high in
large transformers if conductor dimensions and transposition methods are not
chosen properly.
Today’s designer faces challenges like higher loss capitalization and optimum
performance requirements. In addition, there could be constraints on dimensions
and weight of the transformer which is to be designed. If the designer lowers
current density to reduce the DC resistance copper loss (I2R loss), the eddy loss in
windings increases due to increase in conductor dimensions. Hence, the winding
conductor is usually subdivided with a proper transposition method to minimize
the stray losses in windings.
In order to accurately estimate and control the stray losses in windings and
structural parts, in-depth understanding of the fundamentals of eddy currents
starting from basics of electromagnetic fields is desirable. The fundamentals are
described in first few sections of this chapter. The eddy loss and circulating
current loss in windings are analyzed in subsequent sections. Methods for
127
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

128

Chapter 4

evaluation and control of these two losses are also described. Remaining
components of stray losses, mostly the losses in structural components, are dealt
with in Chapter 5.

4.1 Field Equations
The differential forms of Maxwell’s equations, valid for static as well as time
dependent fields and also valid for free space as well as material bodies are:
(4.1)

(4.2)
(4.3)
(4.4)
where

H=magnetic field strength (A/m)
E=electric field strength (V/m)
B=flux density (wb/m2)
J=current density (A/m2)
D=electric flux density (C/m2)
ρ =volume charge density (C/m3)

There are three constitutive relations,
J=σ E
B=µ H
D=ε E
where

(4.5)
(4.6)
(4.7)

µ=permeability of material (henrys/m)
ε=permittivity of material (farads/m)
σ =conductivity (mhos/m)

The ratio of the conduction current density (J) to the displacement current density
(∂D/∂t) is given by the ratio σ/(jωε), which is very high even for a poor metallic
conductor at very high frequencies (where ω is frequency in rad/sec). Since our
analysis is for the (smaller) power frequency, the displacement current density is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

129

neglected for the analysis of eddy currents in conducting parts in transformers
(copper, aluminum, steel, etc.). Hence, equation 4.2 gets simplified to
(4.8)
The principle of conservation of charge gives the point form of the continuity
equation,
(4.9)
In the absence of free electric charges in the present analysis of eddy currents in a
conductor we get
(4.10)
To get the solution, the first-order differential equations 4.1 and 4.8 involving both
H and E are combined to give a second-order equation in H or E as follows.
Taking curl of both sides of equation 4.8 and using equation 4.5 we get

For a constant value of conductivity (σ), using vector algebra the equation can be
simplified as
(4.11)
Using equation 4.6, for linear magnetic characteristics (constant µ) equation 4.3
can be rewritten as
(4.12)
which gives
(4.13)
Using equations 4.1 and 4.13, equation 4.11 gets simplified to
(4.14)
or
(4.15)
Equation 4.15 is a well-known diffusion equation. Now, in the frequency domain,
equation 4.1 can be written as follows:
(4.16)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

130

Chapter 4

In above equation, term jω appears because the partial derivative of a sinusoidal
field quantity with respect to time is equivalent to multiplying the corresponding
phasor by jω. Using equation 4.6 we get
(4.17)
Taking curl of both sides of the equation,
(4.18)
Using equation 4.8 we get
(4.19)
Following the steps similar to those used for arriving at the diffusion equation
4.15 and using the fact that
(since no free
electric charges are present) we get
(4.20)
Substituting the value of J from equation 4.5,
(4.21)
Now, let us assume that the vector field E has component only along the x axis.
(4.22)
The expansion of the operator ∇ leads to the second-order partial differential
equation,
(4.23)
Suppose, if we further assume that Ex is a function of z only (does not vary with x
and y), then equation 4.23 reduces to the ordinary differential equation
(4.24)
We can write the solution of equation 4.24 as
(4.25)
where Exp is the amplitude factor and γ is the propagation constant, which can be
given in terms of the attenuation constant α and phase constant β as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

γ=α+jβ

131
(4.26)

Substituting the value of Ex from equation 4.25 in equation 4.24 we get
(4.27)
which gives
(4.28)
(4.29)
If the field Ex is incident on a surface of a conductor at z=0 and gets attenuated
inside the conductor (z>0), then only the plus sign has to be taken for γ (which is
consistent for the case considered).
(4.30)

(4.31)
Substituting ω=2π f we get
(4.32)
Hence,
(4.33)
The electric field intensity (having a component only along the x axis and
traveling/penetrating inside the conductor in +z direction) expressed in the
complex exponential notation in equation 4.25 becomes
Ex=Expe-γz

(4.34)

which in time domain can be written as
Ex=Expe-αzcos(ωt-βz)

(4.35)

Substituting the values of α and β from equation 4.33 we get
(4.36)
The conductor surface is represented by z=0. Let z>0 and z<0 represent the regions
corresponding to the conductor and perfect loss-free dielectric medium

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

132

Chapter 4

respectively. Thus, the source field at the surface which establishes fields within
the conductor is given by
(Ex)z=0=Expcosωt
Making use of equation 4.5, which says that the current density within a conductor
is directly related to the electrical field intensity, we can write
(4.37)
Equations 4.36 and 4.37 tell us that away from the source at the surface and with
penetration into the conductor there is an exponential decrease in the electric field
intensity and (conduction) current density. At a distance of penetration
the exponential factor becomes e-1(=0.368), indicating that the
value of field (at this distance) reduces to 36.8% of that at the surface. This
distance is called as the skin depth or depth of penetration δ,
(4.38)
All the fields at the surface of a good conductor decay rapidly as they penetrate
few skin depths into the conductor. Comparing equations 4.33 and 4.38, we getthe
relationship,
(4.39)
The depth of penetration or skin depth is a very important parameter in
describing the behavior of a conductor subjected to electromagnetic fields. The
conductivity of copper conductor at 75°C (temperature at which load loss of a
transformer is usually calculated and guaranteed) is 4.74×107 mhos/m. Copper
being a non-magnetic material, its relative permeability is 1. Hence, the depth of
penetration of copper at the power frequency of 50 Hz is

or 10.3 mm. The corresponding value at 60 Hz is 9.4 mm. For aluminum, whose
conductivity is approximately 61% of that of copper, the skin depth at 50 Hz is
13.2 mm. Most of the structural elements inside a transformer are made of either
mild steel or stainless steel material. For a typical grade of mild steel (MS)
material with relative permeability of 100 (assuming that it is saturated) and
conductivity of 7×106 mho/m, the skin depth is δMS=2.69 mm at 50 Hz. A nonmagnetic stainless steel is commonly used for structural components in the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

133

vicinity of the field due to high currents. For a typical grade of stainless steel (SS)
material with relative permeability of 1 (non-magnetic) and conductivity of
1.136×106 mho/m, the skin depth is δss=66.78 mm at 50 Hz.

4.2 Poynting Vector
Poynting’s theorem is the expression of the law of conservation of energy applied
to electromagnetic fields. When the displacement current is neglected, as in the
previous section, Poynting’s theorem can be mathematically expressed as [1,2]
(4.40)
where v is the volume enclosed by the surface s and n is the unit vector normal to
the surface directed outwards. Using equation 4.5, the above equation can be
modified as,
(4.41)
This is a simpler form of Poynting’s theorem which states that the net inflow of
power is equal to the sum of the power absorbed by the magnetic field and the
ohmic loss. The Poynting vector is given by the vector product,
P=E×H

(4.42)

which expresses the instantaneous density of power flow at a point.
Now, with E having only the x component which varies as a function of z only,
equation 4.17 becomes
(4.43)
Substituting the value of Ex from equation 4.34 and rearranging we get
(4.44)
The ratio of Ex to Hy is defined as the intrinsic impedance,
(4.45)
Substituting the value of γ from equation 4.30 we get

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

134

Chapter 4

(4.46)

Using equation 4.38, the above equation can be rewritten as

(4.47)

Now, equation 4.36 can be rewritten in terms of skin depth as
Ex=Expe-z/δ cos(ωt-z/δ)

(4.48)

Using equations 4.45 and 4.47, Hy can be expressed as
(4.49)
Since E is in the x direction and H is in the y direction, the Poynting vector, which
is a cross product of E and H as per equation 4.42, is in the z direction.
(4.50)
Using the identity cosA cosB=1/2[cos(A+B)+cos(A-B)], the above equation
simplifies to
(4.51)
The time average Poynting vector is then given by
(4.52)
Thus, it can be observed that at a distance of one skin depth (z=δ), the power
density is only 0.135 (=e-2) times its value that at the surface. This is very
important fact for the analysis of eddy currents and losses in structural
components of transformers. If the eddy losses in the tank of a transformer due to
incident leakage field emanating from windings are being analyzed by using FEM
analysis, then there should be at least two or three elements in one skin depth for
getting accurate results.
Let us now consider a conductor with field Exp and the corresponding current
density Jxp at the surface as shown in figure 4.1. The fields have the value of 1 p.u.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

135

at the surface. The total power loss in height (length) h and width b is given by the
value of power crossing the conductor surface [2] within the area (h ×b),

(4.53)
The total current in the conductor is found out by integrating the current density
over the infinite depth of the conductor. Using equations 4.34 and 4.39 we get

(4.54)

If this total current is assumed to be uniformly distributed in one skin depth, the
uniform current density can be expressed in the time domain as
(4.55)

Figure 4.1 Penetration of field inside a conductor

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

136

Chapter 4

The total ohmic power loss is given by
(4.56)
The average value of power can be found out as

(4.57)
Since the average value of a cosine term over integral number of periods is zero we
get
(4.58)
which is the same as equation 4.53. Hence, the average power loss in a conductor
may be computed by assuming that the total current is uniformly distributed in one
skin depth. This is a very important result, which is made use of in calculation of
eddy current losses in conductors by numerical methods. When a numerical
method such as Finite Element Method (FEM) is used for estimation of stray
losses in the tank (made of mild steel) of a transformer, it is important to have
element size less than the skin depth of the tank material as explained earlier. With
the other transformer dimensions in meters, it is difficult to have very small
elements inside the tank thickness. Hence, it is convenient to use analytical results
to simplify the numerical analysis. For example in [3], equation 4.58 is used for
estimation of tank losses by 3-D FEM analysis. The method assumes uniform
current density in the skin depth allowing the use of relatively larger element sizes.
The above-mentioned problem of modeling and analysis of skin depths can
also be taken care by using the concept of surface impedance. The intrinsic
impedance can be rewritten from equation 4.46 as
(4.59)
The real part of the impedance, termed as surface resistance, is given by
(4.60)
After calculating the r.m.s. value of the tangential component of the magnetic field
intensity (Hrms) at the surface of the tank or any other structural component in the
transformer by either numerical or analytical method, the specific loss per unit
surface area can be calculated by the expression [4,5]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

137

(4.61)

Thus, the total losses in the transformer tank can be determined by integrating the
specific loss on its internal surface.

4.3 Eddy Current and Hysteresis Losses
All the analysis done previously assumed linear material (B-H) characteristics
meaning that the permeability (µ) is constant. The material used for structural
components in transformers is usually magnetic steel (mild steel), which is a
ferromagnetic material having a much larger value of relative permeability (µr) as
compared to the free space (for which µr=1). The material has non-linear B-H
characteristics and the permeability itself is a function of H. Moreover, the
characteristics also exhibit hysteresis property. Equation 4.6 (B=µH)has to be
suitably modified to reflect the non-linear characteristics and hysteresis behavior.
Hysteresis introduces a time phase difference between B and H; B lags H by an
angle ( θ ) known as the hysteresis angle. One of the ways in which the
characteristics can be mathematically expressed is by complex or elliptical
permeability,
µh=µe-jθ

(4.62)

In this formulation, where harmonics introduced by saturation are ignored, the
hysteresis loop becomes an ellipse with the major axis making an angle of θ with
the H axis as shown in figure 4.2. The significance of complex permeability is that
a functional relationship between B and H is now realized in which the
permeability is made independent of H resulting into a linear system [6]. Let us
now find an expression for the eddy current and hysteresis loss for an infinite halfspace shown in figure 4.3.

Figure 4.2 Elliptic hysteresis loop

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Figure 4.3 Infinite half space

138

Chapter 4

The infinite half-space is an extension of the geometry shown in figure 4.1 in the
sense that the region of the material under consideration extends from -∞ to +∞ in
the x and y directions, and from 0 to ∞ in the z direction. Similar to Section 4.1, we
assume that E and H vectors have components in only the x and y directions
respectively, and that they are function of z only. The diffusion equation 4.15 can
be rewritten for this case with the complex permeability as
(4.63)
A solution satisfying boundary conditions,
Hy=H0 at z=0 and Hy=0 at z=∞

(4.64)

is given by
Hy=H0e-kz

(4.65)

where constant k is
(4.66)
and

α=cos(θ/2)+sin(θ/2) and β=cos(θ/2)-sin(θ/2)

(4.67)
(4.68)

Using equation 4.8 and the fact that Hx=Hz=0 we get
(4.69)
The time average density of eddy and hysteresis losses can be found by computing
the real part of the complex Poynting vector evaluated at the surface [1],
(4.70)
Now,
(4.71)
and
(4.72)
(4.73)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

139

In the absence of hysteresis (θ=0), α=β=1 as per equation 4.67. Hence, the eddy
loss per unit surface area is given by

(4.74)
Substituting the expression for skin depth from equation 4.38 and using the r.m.s.
value of magnetic field intensity (Hrms) at the surface we get

(4.75)
which is same as equation 4.61, as it should be in the absence of hysteresis (for
linear B-H characteristics).

4.4 Effect of Saturation
In a transformer, the structural components (mostly made from magnetic steel) are
subjected to the leakage field and/or high current field. The incident field gets
predominantly concentrated in the skin depth (1 to 3 mm) near the surface. Hence,
the structural components may be in a state of saturation depending upon the
magnitude of the incident field. The eddy current losses predicted by the
calculations based on a constant relative permeability are found to be smaller than
the actual experimental values. Thus, although the magnetic saturation is part of
same physical phenomenon as the hysteresis effect, it is considerably more
important in its effect on the eddy current losses. The step function magnetization
curve, as shown in figure 4.4 (a), is the simplest way of taking the saturation into
account for an analytical solution of eddy current problems. It can be expressed by
an equation,

Figure 4.4 Step-magnetization

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

140

Chapter 4
B=(sign of H)Bs

(4.76)

where Bs is the saturation flux density. The magnetic field intensity H at the
surface is sinusoidally varying with time (=H0 sinωt). The extreme depth to which
the field penetrates and beyond which there is no field is called as depth of
penetration δs. This depth of penetration has a different connotation as compared
to that with constant or linear permeability. In this case, the depth of penetration is
simply the maximum depth the field will penetrate at the end of each half period.
The depth of penetration for a thick plate (thickness much larger than the depth of
penetration so that it can be considered as infinite half space) is given by [1,7,8]
(4.77)
It can be observed that for this non-linear case with step magnetization
characteristics, the linear permeability in equation 4.38 gets replaced by the ratio
Bs/H0. Further, the equation for average power per unit area can be derived as
(478)
Comparing this with equation 4.74, it can be noted that if we put µ=Bs/H0, δs will
be equal to δ and in that case the loss in the saturated material is 70% higher than
the loss in the material having linear B-H characteristics. Practically, the actual BH curve is in between the linear and step characteristics, as shown in figure 4.4 (b).
In [7], it is pointed out that as we penetrate inside into the material, each
succeeding inner layer is magnetized by a progressively smaller number of
exciting ampere-turns because of shielding effect of eddy currents in the region
between the outermost surface and the layer under consideration. In stepmagnetization characteristics, the flux density has the same magnitude
irrespective of the magnitude of mmf. Due to this departure of the step curve
response from the actual response, the value of Bs is replaced by 0.75×Bs. From
equations 4.77 and 4.78, it is clear that
and hence the constant 1.7 in
equation 4.78 would reduce to

i.e., 1.47. As per Rosenberg’s theory,

the constant is 1.33 [7]. Hence, in the simplified analytical formulations, linear
characteristics are assumed after taking into account the non-linearity by the
linearization coefficient in the range of 1.3 to 1.5. For example, a coefficient of 1.4
is used in [9] for the calculation of losses in tank and other structural components
in transformers.
After having seen in details the fundamentals of eddy currents, we will now
analyze eddy current and circulating current losses in windings in the following
sections. Analysis of stray losses in structural components, viz. tank, frames, flitch
plates, high current terminations, etc., is covered in Chapter 5.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

141

4.5 Eddy Loss in Transformer Winding
4.5.1 Expression for eddy loss
Theory of eddy currents explained in the previous sections will be useful while
deriving the expression for the eddy loss in windings. The losses in a transformer
winding due to an alternating current are usually more than that due to direct
current of the same effective (r.m.s.) value. There are two different approaches of
analyzing this increase in losses. In the first approach, we assume that the load
current in the winding is uniformly distributed in the conductor cross section
(similar to the direct current) and, in addition to the load current, there exist eddy
currents which produce extra losses. Alternatively, one can calculate losses due to
the combined action of the load current and eddy currents. The former method is
more suitable for the estimation of eddy loss in winding conductors, in which
eddy loss due to the leakage field (produced by the load current) is calculated
separately and then added to the DC I2R loss. The latter method is preferred for
calculating circulating current losses, in which the resultant current in each
conductor is calculated first, followed by the calculation of losses (which give the
total of DC I2R loss and circulating current loss). We will first analyze eddy losses
in windings in this section; the circulating current losses are dealt with in the next
section.
Consider a winding conductor, as shown in figure 4.5, which is placed in an
alternating magnetic field along the y direction having the peak amplitude of H0.
The conductor can be assumed to be infinitely long in the x direction. The current
density Jx and magnetic field intensity Hy are assumed as functions of z only.
Rewriting the (diffusion) equation 4.15 for the sinusoidal variation of the field
quantity and noting that the winding conductor, either copper or aluminum, has
constant permeability (linear B-H characteristics),
(4.79)

Figure 4.5 Estimation of eddy loss in a winding conductor

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

142

Chapter 4

A solution satisfying this equation is
Hy=C1eγz+C2e-γz

(4.80)

where γ is defined by equation 4.32. In comparison with equation 4.65, equation
4.80 has two terms indicating waves traveling in both +z and -z directions (which
is consistent with figure 4.5). The incident fields on both the surfaces, having peak
amplitude of H0, penetrate inside the conductor along the z axis in opposite
directions (it should be noted that equation 4.80 is also a general solution of
equation 4.63, in which case C1=0 and C2=H0 for the boundary conditions
specified by equation 4.64). For the present case, the boundary conditions are
Hy=H0 at z=+b and Hy=H0 at z=-b

(4.81)

Using these boundary conditions, we can get the expression for the constants as
(4.82)

Putting these values of constants in equation 4.80 we get
(4.83)

Using equation 4.8 and the fact that Hx=Hz=0, the current density is
(4.84)

The loss produced per unit surface area (of the x-y plane) of the conductor in terms
of the peak value of current density
is given by

(4.85)
Now, using equation 4.39 we get

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

143

(4.86)
Substituting this magnitude of current density in equation 4.85 we get

(4.87)

(4.88)

or
(4.89)

where
When

equation 4.89 can be simplified to
(4.90)

Equation 4.90 gives the value of eddy loss per unit surface area of a conductor
with its dimension, perpendicular to the applied field, much greater than the depth
of penetration. Such a case, with the field applied on both the surfaces of the
conductor, is equivalent to two infinite half spaces. Therefore, the total eddy loss
given by equation 4.90 is two times that of the infinite half space given by
equation 4.74. For such thick conductors/plates (winding made of copper bars,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

144

Chapter 4

structural component made of magnetic steel having sufficiently large thickness,
etc.), the resultant current distribution is greatly influenced and limited by the
effect its own field and the currents are said to be inductance limited (currents are
confined to the surface layers).
Now, let us analyze the case when dimension (thickness) of the conductor is
quite small as compared to its depth of penetration, which is usually the case for
rectangular paper insulated conductors used in transformers. For 2b<<δ, i.e.,
ξ<<1, equation 4.89 can be simplified to

(4.91)

Neglecting higher order terms and substituting the expression of δ from equation
4.38 we get
(4.92)
Now, if the thickness of the winding conductor is t, then substituting b=t/2 in
equation 4.92 we get
(4.93)
It is more convenient to find an expression for the mean eddy loss per unit volume
(since the volume of the conductor in the winding is usually known). Hence,
dividing by t and finally substituting resistivity (ρ) in place of conductivity, we get
the expression for the eddy loss in the winding conductor per unit volume as
(4.94)
In case of thin conductors, the eddy currents are restricted by the lack of space or
high resistivity and are said to be resistance limited. In other words, since the field
of the eddy currents is negligible for thin conductors, the behavior is resistance

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

145

limited. Equation 4.94 matches exactly with that derived in [10] by ignoring the
magnetic field produced by the eddy currents. These currents are 90° out of phase
with the load current (uniformly distributed current which produces the leakage
field and is also responsible for DC I2R loss in windings) flowing in the conductor.
The eddy currents are shown to be lagging by 90° with respect to the load (source)
current for a thin circular conductor in the later part of this section. The total
current flowing in the conductor can be visualized to be a vector sum of the eddy
current (Ieddy) and load current (Iload), having the magnitude of
because these two current components are 90° out of phase in a thin conductor.
This is a very important and convenient result because it means that the I2R losses
due to load current and eddy current losses can be calculated separately and then
added later for thin conductors.
Equation 4.94 is very well-known and useful formula for calculation of eddy
losses in windings. If we assume that the leakage field in windings is in axial
direction only, then we can calculate the mean value of eddy loss in the whole
winding by using the equations of Section 3.1.1. The axial leakage field for an
inner winding (with a radial depth of R and height of HW) varies linearly from
inside diameter to outside diameter as shown in figure 4.6. The thickness of the
conductor, which is its dimension perpendicular to the axial field, is usually quite
small. Hence, the same value of flux density (B0) can be assumed along both its
vertical surfaces (along width w). The position of the conductor changes along the
radial depth as the turns are wound. Hence, in order to calculate the mean value of
the eddy loss of the whole winding, we have to first calculate the mean value of
The r.m.s. value of ampere turns are linearly changing from 0 at the inside
diameter (ID) to NI at the outside diameter (OD). The peak value of flux density at
a distance x from the inside diameter is
(4.95)

The mean flux density value, which gives the same overall loss, is given by

(4.96)

Simplifying we get
(4.97)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

146

Chapter 4

Figure 4.6 Leakage flux density in winding

where Bgp is the peak value of flux density in the LV-HV gap,
(4.98)
Hence, using equations 4.97 and 4.94, the mean eddy loss per unit volume of the
winding due to the axial leakage field is expressed as
(4.99)
If we are interested in finding the mean value of eddy loss in a section of a
winding in which ampere-turns are changing from α(NI) at ID to b(NI) at OD,
where NI are rated r.m.s. ampere-turns, the mean value of
can be easily found
out by using the procedure similar to that given in Section 3.1.1 as
(4.100)

and the mean eddy loss per unit volume in the section is
(4.101)

Equation 4.101 tells us that for a winding consisting of a number of layers, the
mean eddy loss of the layer adjacent to LV-HV gap is higher than that of others.
For example, in the case of a 2-layer winding,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

147

indicating that the mean eddy loss in the second layer close to the gap is 1.75
times the mean eddy loss for the entire winding. Similarly, for a 4-layer winding,

giving the mean eddy loss in the 4th layer as 2.31 times the mean eddy loss for the
entire winding. Hence, it is always advisable to calculate the total loss (I2R+eddy)
in each layer separately and estimate the temperature rise of each layer. Such a
calculation procedure helps designers to take countermeasures to eliminate high
temperature rise in windings. Also, the temperatures measured by fiber-optic
sensors (if installed) will be closer to the calculated values when such a calculation
procedure is adopted.
Eddy loss calculated by equation 4.99 is approximate since it assumes the
leakage field entirely in the axial direction. As seen in Chapter 3, there exists a
radial component of the leakage field at winding ends and in winding zones where
ampere-turns per unit height are different for LV and HV windings. For small
distribution transformers, the error introduced by neglecting the radial field may
not be appreciable, and equation 4.99 is generally used with some empirical
correction factor applied to the total calculated stray loss value. Analytical/
numerical methods, described in Chapter 3, need to be used for the correct
estimation of the radial field. The amount of efforts required for getting the
accurate eddy loss value may not get justified for very small distribution
transformers. For medium and large power transformers, however, the eddy loss
due to the radial field has to be estimated and the same can be found out by using
equation 4.94, for which the dimension of the conductor perpendicular to the
radial field is its width w. Hence, the eddy losses per unit volume due to axial (By)
and radial (Bx) components of leakage field are
(4.102)

(4.103)

Thus, the leakage field incident on a winding conductor (see figure 4.7) is
resolved into two components, viz. By and Bx, and losses due to these two

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

148

Chapter 4

components are calculated separately by equations 4.102 and 4.103 and then
added. This is permitted because the eddy currents associated with these two
perpendicular components do not overlap (since the angle between them is 90°).
We have assumed that the conductor dimension is very much less than the
depth of penetration while deriving equation 4.94. This is particularly true in the
case of loss due to the axial field. The conductor thickness used in transformers
mostly falls in the range of 2 to 3.5 mm, which is considerably less than the depth
of penetrations of copper and aluminum which are 10.3 mm and 13.2 mm
respectively at 50 Hz. The conductor width is usually closer to the value of depth
of penetration. If the conductor width is equal to the depth of penetration
(w=2b=δ), equation 4.89 becomes

Comparing this value with that given by equation 4.92,

the error of just 4% is obtained, which is quite acceptable. Hence, it can be
concluded that the eddy loss due to the radial field can also be calculated with a
reasonable accuracy from equation 4.103 for the conductor widths comparable to
the depth of penetration.
For thin circular conductors of radius of R, if the ratio R/δ is small, we can
neglect the magnetic field of eddy currents. If the total current in the conductor is
I cosωt, the uniform current density is given by
(4.104)

Figure 4.7 Winding conductor in a leakage field

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

149

and the eddy current density at any radius r inside the conductor is [8]
(4.105)
Thus, it can be observed from equations 4.104 and 4.105 that for thin
conductors (resistance-limited behavior), the eddy currents lag the exciting
current (the current which produces the field responsible for eddy currents) by
90°. Contrary to this, for thick conductors (thickness or radius much larger than
the depth of penetration), the eddy currents lag the exciting current by 180°
(inductance-limited behavior in which the currents are confined to the surface
layers).
The power loss per unit length of the thin circular conductor can be found out
by using equations 4.104 and 4.105 as (J0 and Je are 90° apart, square of their sum
is sum of their squares)
(4.106)
The power loss per unit length due to the exciting current alone is
(4.107)
Therefore, the ratio of effective AC resistance to DC resistance of a thin circular
conductor can be deduced from equations 4.106 and 4.107 as
(4.108)
For thick circular conductors (R>>δ), the effective resistance is that of the
annular ring of diameter 2R and thickness δ, since all the current can be assumed
to be concentrated in one depth of penetration as seen in Section 4.2. Hence, the
effective AC resistance per unit length is
RAC=1/(2πRδσ)

(4.109)

and
(4.110)
4.5.2 Methods of estimation
As said earlier, the axial and radial components of a field can be estimated by
analytical or numerical methods. Accurate estimation of eddy loss due to the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

150

Chapter 4

radial leakage field by means of empirical formulae is not possible. The analytical
methods [11,12] and two-dimensional FEM [13, 14] can be used to calculate the
eddy loss due to axial and radial leakage fields. It is assumed that the eddy currents
do not have influence on the leakage field (the case of thin conductors). The FEM
analysis is quite commonly used for the eddy loss calculations. The winding is
divided into many sections. For each section the corresponding ampere-turn
density is defined. The value of conductivity is not defined for these sections. The
values of By and Bx for each conductor can be obtained from the FEM solution, and
then the axial and radial components of the eddy loss are calculated for each
conductor by using equations 4.102 and 4.103 respectively. The By and Bx values
are assumed to be constant over a single conductor and equal to the value at the
center of the conductor. If the cylindrical coordinate system is used, By and Bx
components are replaced by Bz and Br components respectively. The total eddy
loss for each winding is calculated by integrating the loss components of all its
conductors.
Sometimes a very quick but reasonably accurate calculation of eddy loss is
required. At the tender design stage, an optimization program may have to work
hundreds of designs to arrive at the optimum design. In such cases, expressions for
the eddy loss in windings for their simple configurations can be found out using
multiple regression method in conjunction with Orthogonal Array Design of
Experiments technique [15]. With the quantum improvement in the speed of
computational tools, it is now possible to integrate the accurate analytical/
numerical methods in the main design optimization program.
For cylindrical windings in core-type transformers, the two-dimensional
methods give sufficiently accurate eddy loss values. For getting most accurate
results, three-dimensional magnetic field calculations have also been used [16,
17,18]. Once the three-dimensional field solution is obtained, the three
components of the flux density (Bx, By and Bz) are resolved into two components,
viz. the axial and radial components, which enables the use of equations 4.102 and
4.103 for the eddy loss evaluation.
For small distribution transformers with LV winding having crossmatic
conductor (thick rectangular bar conductor), each and every turn of LV winding
has to be modeled (with the value of conductivity defined) in FEM analysis. This
is because the thickness of the bar conductor is usually comparable to or
sometimes more than the depth of penetration and its width is usually more than 5
times the depth of penetration. With such a conductor having large dimensions, a
significant modification of the leakage field occurs due to the eddy currents,
which cannot be neglected in the calculations.
The problem of accurate estimation of winding eddy loss seems to be quite
resolved by method such as 2-D FEM. The analysis of winding eddy loss by 3-D
FEM analysis is the most accurate one, but the computational efforts involved
should be compared with the improvement obtained in the accuracy.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

151

4.5.3 Optimization of losses and elimination of winding hot spots
In order to reduce the DC resistance (I2R) loss, if the designer increases the
conductor dimensions, the eddy loss in windings increases. Hence, optimization
of the total of I2R and eddy loss should be done.
The knowledge of flux density distribution in a winding helps in choosing
proper dimensions of conductors. This is particularly important for a winding with
tappings within its body, in which the high value of radial flux density can cause
excessive loss and temperature rise. For the minimization of radial flux, balancing
of ampere-turns per unit height of LV and HV windings should be done (for
various sections along their height) at the average tap position. The winding can
be designed with different conductor dimensions in the tap zone to minimize the
risk of hot spots. Guidelines are given in [19] for choosing the conductor width for
eliminating hot spots in windings. For 50 Hz frequency, the maximum width that
can be used is usually in the range of 12 to 14 mm, whereas for 60 Hz it is of the
order of 10 to 12 mm. This guideline is useful in the absence of detailed analysis
which involves calculation of temperature rise in the part of the winding where a
hot spot is expected. For calculating the temperature rise of a disk/turn, its I2R loss
and eddy loss should be added. An idle winding between LV and HV windings
links the high gap flux resulting in higher eddy loss. Hence, its conductor
dimensions should be properly decided.
In gapped core shunt reactors, there is considerable flux fringing between limb
packets (separated by non-magnetic gap), resulting in an appreciable radial flux
causing excessive losses in the reactor winding if the distance between the reactor
winding and core is small or if the conductor width is large.
One of the most logical ways of reducing the eddy loss of a winding is to subdivide winding conductors into a number of parallel conductors. If a conductor
having thickness t is sub-divided into 2 insulated parallel conductors of thickness
t/2, the eddy loss due to axial leakage field reduces by a factor of 1/4 (refer to
equation 4.102). In actual practice, from the short circuit withstand considerations
there is a limitation imposed on the minimum thickness that can be used. Also, if
the width to thickness ratio of a rectangular conductor is more than about 6, there
is difficulty in winding it. The sub-division of the conductor also impairs the
winding space factor in the radial direction. This is because each individual
parallel conductor in a turn has to be insulated increasing the total insulation
thickness in the radial direction. In order to improve the space factor, sometimes a
bunch conductor is used in which usually two or three parallel conductors are
bunched in a common paper covering. The advantage is that the individual
conductor needs to be insulated with a lower paper insulation thickness because of
the outermost common paper covering. A single bunch conductor is also easier to
wind, since no crossovers are required at ID and OD of the winding. In contrast to
this, for example in the case of two parallel conductors, the two conductors are
usually crossed over at ID and OD of each disk for the ease of winding. Three
rectangular strip conductors and the corresponding bunch conductor are shown in

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

152

Chapter 4

figure 4.8. For a strip conductor of radial thickness 2 mm with a radial paper
covering of 0.5 mm, the total radial dimension of three strip conductors is 9 mm,
whereas for a bunch conductor with the individual radial insulation of 0.175 mm
and the common outermost radial insulation of 0.325 mm, the total radial
dimension is 7.7 mm (=3×(2+2×0.175)+2×0.325) giving 15% improvement in the
space factor.
For a continuously transposed cable (CTC) conductor, in which a number of
small rectangular conductors are transposed at regular intervals, it is possible to
use quite a small thickness (as low as 1.2 mm) and width (as low as 3.8 mm),
resulting into considerably less amount of eddy loss. A cost-benefit analysis has to
be done to check the advantage gained by the reduction of losses versus the higher
cost of the CTC conductor. For transformer specifications with higher value of
load loss capitalization (dollars per kW of load loss), the CTC conductor may give
a lower total capitalized cost (material cost plus loss cost) particularly in large
transformers. The low voltage winding in large generator transformers is usually
designed with the CTC conductor to minimize the eddy loss and improve
productivity. The CTC conductor is shown in figure 4.9.
One more way of reducing the eddy loss is by use of two conductors with
different widths along the winding height. At the winding ends, there may be
appreciable eddy loss due to the fact that radial flux is incident perpendicularly on
the wider conductor dimension (width). This loss can be decreased by reducing
the conductor width for few disks at the ends based on the detailed FEM analysis
and increasing the width for remaining length of the winding where the leakage
field is predominantly axial, so that I2R losses are maintained approximately
constant. Such an arrangement can give reduction in the winding loss (I2R+eddy)
by about 1 to 2% in large transformers.
In another method, end disks can have less turns per disk (one or two turns less
as compared to the other part of winding) in HV winding having a large number of
turns per disk. A conductor with higher thickness and lower width can be used for
these disks so that I2R loss is kept approximately constant and eddy losses are
reduced. Here, the assumption is that the increase in axial eddy loss due to higher
thickness is more than compensated by the decrease in radial eddy loss due to
lower width (which means that the radial field is contributing more to the eddy
loss as compared to the axial field).

Figure 4.8 Strip and bunch conductor

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Figure 4.9 CTC conductor

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

153

In both these methods, ampere-turns of HV and LV windings per unit height
should be equal (for various sections along their height); otherwise there will be
an extra radial flux and corresponding losses, nullifying the advantages gained.
Some manufacturers use the combination of strip and CTC conductors to
minimize winding losses. The CTC conductor is used for a few top and bottom
disks minimizing the eddy loss, whereas the remaining disks are made out of the
strip conductor. This technique requires establishment of a proper method for
making the joint of the strip and CTC conductors.
4.5.4 Eddy loss in foil windings
In small transformers, foil windings (made up of thin sheets of copper or
aluminum) are quite popular because of the simplicity obtained in the winding
operations. The metal foil and the insulation layer can be wound simultaneously
on a special machine and the whole process can be easily mechanized. In foil
windings, eddy loss due to axial leakage field is insignificant because of very
small thickness of the foil. On the contrary, the radial field results into higher eddy
loss at the ends of the foil windings. The eddy loss in a foil winding can be
evaluated by analytical or numerical methods. The current density has been
obtained as a solution of integral equation (Fredholm type) for a two winding
transformer in [20]. For specific transformer dimensions given in the paper, the
coefficient of additional loss is 1.046, i.e., the eddy loss is 4.6% of the DC I2R loss.
In another approach [21], a boundary-value field problem is solved for magnetic
vector potential in cylindrical coordinate system using modified Bessel and Struve
functions. For symmetrically placed LV (foil) and HV windings, the additional
loss factor reported is 5.8%. For an asymmetrical arrangement of windings this
loss increases.
In [22], the foil winding is assumed as a vertical section of an infinitely wide
and deep conducting plate, which is assumed symmetrically penetrated on both
sides by plane electromagnetic waves. The geometry is given in figure 4.10, where
h is the height of the foil winding and Bx denotes the value of flux density at
winding ends. The induced eddy current density (with the vertical dimensions
specified with respect to the middle of the winding height) is [22]

Figure 4.10 Foil winding analysis

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

154

Chapter 4

(4.111)

The eddy loss in terms of the peak value of current density is given as
(4.112)
It is clear from equations 4.111 and 4.112 that
(4.113)
Hence, the maximum value of eddy loss occurs at y=h/2 (at two ends of the
winding) since at this height the exponential term has the maximum value of 1,

whereas its value is just 0.0067 at y=(h/2)-2.5δ, which means that more than 99%
of the induced eddy current loss occurs in just 2.5δ depth from the winding ends.
For an aluminum foil winding, whose skin depth is 13.2 mm at 50 Hz, almost all
the eddy loss is concentrated in 33 mm from the winding ends. The foil winding
eddy current density distribution calculated by equation 4.111 for a typical
transformer is shown in figure 4.11.
Thus, the current density at the ends can be about 1.5 to 2 times the uniform
current density, resulting into local heating of 2.25 to 4 times that in the middle
portion of the winding. Hence, the temperature rise at the foil winding ends should
be carefully assessed.

Figure 4.11 Eddy current distribution in a foil winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

155

Usually, there is no temperature rise problem in a foil winding since the thermal
conductivity of aluminum/copper is quite good, and the winding edges are well
exposed to the cooling medium. If a transformer with foil winding is supplying a
power electronic load, there is increase in the heating effect at winding ends on
account of harmonics [23].
With the development in computational facilities, the numerical tools such as
FEM can easily analyze the foil winding eddy problem without any
simplifications done in analytical formulations. It is actually a three-dimensional
problem. The losses in a foil winding calculated in the core-window cross section
are lower than that calculated in the region outside the window. The radial flux at
winding ends is usually more in the region outside the window, and hence the
additional loss factor may be of the order of 10 to 15%. The position of foil
winding affects its eddy loss significantly. If the foil winding is the outer winding,
the radial flux density at ends reduces resulting in reduction of eddy loss [24].

4.6 Circulating Current Loss in Transformer Windings
We have seen that the leakage field in a transformer is responsible for extra losses
in windings in addition to the DC I2R loss. If the windings have a single solid
conductor then eddy currents flow causing the eddy loss, and no circulating
current loss appears. In the windings with large current ratings, conductor has to
be sub-divided into a number of parallel conductors to reduce the eddy loss to an
acceptable/optimum value. Without proper transposition, the leakage flux linked
by these parallel conductors is different, inducing different voltages in them.
Since the conductors are paralleled at the ends, there will be net induced voltages
in the loops formed by these conductors resulting into circulating currents. These
circulating currents flow back and forth within the parallel conductors, and thus
do not flow outside the windings. The appearing value of circulating current loss
adds to the other stray loss components resulting into higher load loss.
The circulating current loss, if not controlled, may cause hot spots in the
windings of large power transformers. The circulating current loss depends
very much on the physical locations of the conductors in the leakage field. This
loss can be avoided if the location of each conductor in the layer and from layer
to layer is such that all conductors are linked with an equal amount of leakage
flux. Such a winding is said to have ideal/complete transposition in which each
conductor occupies the position of every other conductor. This can be achieved
by doing suitable transpositions between the parallel conductors. In the absence
of transpositions, the advantage gained through the eddy loss reduction (by
sub-division of conductors) will be lost due to the circulating current loss.
Inaccurate or inadequate transpositions introduce circulating currents in
transformer windings, which can be calculated by either analytical or
numerical methods.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

156

Chapter 4

4.6.1 Analytical methods
Analytical formulae are given in [25] to calculate the circulating current loss for
various types of windings. In this formulation, the ampere-turn diagram is
assumed to have trapezoidal form. The leakage flux density (B) at the inside of the
conductor and in the paper covering is calculated. Integrating this value of B over
the thickness, the flux/cm is obtained. The voltage gradient is then calculated as
the sum of the resistance drops of load current and stray currents (eddy plus
circulating currents), and the reactive drop induced by the flux. The circulating
current component is calculated assuming that it is uniform in the whole cross
section of the conductor. The effect of circulating currents on the leakage field has
been neglected in this approximate method. Hence, it gives higher value of
circulating current losses than the actual value.
It is shown in the paper that circulating current loss for an untransposed layer
winding is the same as the eddy loss in an equivalent one solid conductor. In other
words, if a winding conductor of thickness t is split into two conductors of
thickness t/2, the circulating current loss for the untransposed case of these two
conductors is same as the eddy loss in the conductor of thickness t. Hence, if a
winding conductor is sub-divided into parallel conductors which are
untransposed, the total stray loss in the winding (eddy and circulating losses) will
theoretically remain unchanged.
In order that each conductor occupies the position of every other conductor,
various transposition schemes are used depending upon the type of winding and
its conductor. Two such schemes are shown in figure 4.12 for a layer winding with
four parallel conductors. In both the cases, all the conductors are occupying all the
four positions and hence they are linked with the same value of leakage field
(assuming that the field is entirely in the axial direction) resulting in no circulating
currents.

Figure 4.12 Transposition schemes in a layer winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

157

Figure 4.13 Transposition scheme for 5 parallel conductors

In general, for n parallel conductors one ideally needs n–1 transpositions
equally spaced along the winding height. For example, in the case of 5 parallel
conductors, there should be 4 transpositions as shown in figure 4.13. At every
transposition, the top conductor is brought to the bottom position. A thin
rectangular copper strip of nearly the same cross-sectional area (as that of the
conductor) can be used to join the two cut parts of the conductor by a brazing
operation. The conductor can be brought to the bottom position without the
cutting and brazing operations by providing a slanting support made of an
insulation material.
There is one more scheme [26, p. 147 of 25] which can be used in small
transformers in which only 3 transpositions are done in place of n-1 transpositions
in order to reduce the manufacturing time. A typical scheme is shown in figure
4.14 for 12 parallel conductors. In this scheme, parallel conductors are divided
into four groups for the middle transposition, and hence the number of parallel
conductors has to be multiple of 4.

Figure 4.14 Transposition scheme for layer winding with 12 parallel conductors

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

158

Chapter 4

This is not the ideal transposition scheme since none of the conductors is
occupying the position of every other conductor. But each conductor occupies
such 4 positions that the average value of the field linked by a conductor is not
much different than that of the others, when only the axial field is considered. The
transposition scheme may be used with caution in small transformers when the
radial field at ends and within body of windings is insignificant.
In the discussion of paper [25], Rabins and Cogbill have given a very useful
and quick method to check the correctness of any transposition scheme. As per
this method, for each conductor a sum

is calculated where p is a particular position and Np is number of turns (out of total
turns N) in position p. Let us apply the method to check the transposition scheme
given in figure 4.14. Conductor 1 in figure 4.14 occupies positions 1, 6, 9 and 10
for which s 1=0.25×(1×0+6×5+9×8+10×9)=48. Similarly, the value of s for
remaining conductors can be found out. Here, it is assumed that the conductor
occupies each of the 4 positions for 25% of the winding height. If this is not true or
if a transposition is missed by one turn or one disk by mistake during
manufacturing, the corresponding number of turns in each position should be
taken. The closeness of s values for all the parallel conductors is a good indicator
of the correctness of the transposition scheme. The average of s values for all
conductors is calculated (savg). The circulating current (Pcc) loss is calculated in
terms of the winding eddy loss (Peddy) as

(4.114)

where t and ti are individual conductor thickness and insulation thickness between
adjacent conductors respectively. For example, if the values of t and ti are 2.3 mm
and 0.5 mm respectively for the winding shown in figure 4.14, Pcc=0.0206 Peddy,
which is negligible. This indicates that the transposition scheme given in figure
4.14, although not ideal, is sufficiently good to reduce the circulating current loss
to a very low value. It should be noted that the calculation assumed the axial
leakage field only. Hence, the method may be used for small transformers only,
when the radial field in them is low. The method will not be effective if there is an
appreciable radial field in any part of the winding. Also, at the middle
transposition, the conductors have to be properly supported while they are being
transposed, which otherwise may be vulnerable when subjected to short circuit
forces.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

159

Now, let us analyze continuous disk windings having a number of turns in the
radial direction with each turn having two or more parallel conductors. Usually,
the number of parallel conductors in a continuous disk winding is less than that in
a layer winding. Hence, the problem of circulating current loss is less ominous in
continuous disk windings since the radial depth of one turn (consisting of two or
more parallel conductors) is smaller. A continuous disk winding having Nd turns/
disk and n parallel conductors per turn, with crossovers between conductors at
inside and outside diameters of every disk, is equivalent to a multi-layer winding
with Nd layers with each layer having n parallel conductors transposed at its center
(middle height position).
A continuous disk winding with 8 parallel conductors and 3 turns per disk is
shown in figure 4.15. Kaul’s formula [25] for estimation of circulating current loss
for such a continuous winding with n parallel conductors is
(4.115)

where
R=radial depth of insulated turn =n(t+ti)
(4.116)

ρ =resistivity of conductor material (copper or aluminum)
hc=total length (height) of copper or aluminum in the axial direction
hw=length (height) of winding in the axial direction
Ratios hc/hw and t/(t+ti) define winding space factors in the axial and radial
directions respectively. Let us calculate the circulating current loss for the winding
shown in figure 4.15 with the following parameters:
f =50 Hz
t=2.4 mm, ti= 0.7 mm
hc/hw=0.8
ρ =0.0211x10-6 ohm-m for a copper conductor
and

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

160

Chapter 4

Figure 4.15 Continuous disk winding

The circulating current loss in the winding is

Pcc=0.053×(I2R Loss)
For I2R loss of 130 kW for this winding (for all 3-phases), total circulating current
loss is about 6.9 kW, which is an appreciable value. This circulating current loss
can be almost eliminated by doing the group transpositions at appropriate places
similar to that for a layer winding shown in figure 4.14.
It should be noted that in the analytical methods discussed till now, only the
axial leakage field is considered and the effect of the radial leakage field is
neglected. Due to this assumption the calculation is quite easy, and the extra loss
on account of circulating currents can be found very quickly while the transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

161

design is in progress. Although these methods may not give the accurate loss
value, designers can use them to check the correctness of the transposition method
used and arrive at the best possible transposition scheme.
4.6.2 Method based on multi-winding transformer theory
This method is based on circuit equations of a multi-winding transformer. Let us
consider the layer winding shown in figure 4.14. The LV winding, consisting of 12
parallel conductors, can be considered as made of 12 windings. Hence, with HV
winding, it becomes a system of 13 windings. Following circuit equations can be
written for this system of 13 windings in terms of per-unit short circuit (leakage)
impedances between the pairs of windings [27],

(4.117)

(4.118)
Similarly, remaining 10 equations for V13-V3, V13-V4,······,V13-V12 can be written. If
the load loss test is performed by applying the impedance voltage to HV winding
(number 13) with all 12 LV windings short-circuited, then
I1+I2+I3+······+I13=0

(4.119)

V1=V2=V3=······=V12=0

(4.120)

and

The leakage impedance between the pairs of windings can be calculated by using
the conventional formulae (of Section 3.1.1) considering the four distinct
positions occupied by each of these 12 LV windings along their height. The perunit leakage impedance (R+jX) is calculated with the transformer MVA as the
base. A more accurate estimation of leakage impedance can be made by using
FEM analysis [28]. This combined method, in which FEM is used (for calculation
of impedances) in conjunction with the multi-winding theory, is quite accurate
method in two dimensions. The following system of 12 equations can be easily
solved to give the currents flowing in 12 parallel conductors:

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

162

Chapter 4

Figure 4.16 Details of 10 MVA transformer

(4.121)
Let us now calculate the circulating current loss for a transformer with LV winding
having 12 parallel conductors. The dimensions of windings are shown in figure
4.16. The transformer specification and relevant design details are:
10 MVA, 33/6.9 kV, star/star, 50 Hz Transformer
Volts/turn=46.87, Z=7.34%
LV conductor: thickness=2.3 mm, insulation between conductors=0.5 mm,
area of one conductor=22.684×10-6m2
Total conductor area=12×area of one conductor=272.21×10-6m2
Mean diameter of LV winding=0.495 m
Turns in LV winding=85
LV winding volume for 3 phases =272.2 1×10-6×(π×0.495×85×3)
=0.1079 m3
Currents calculated by the method are given in table 4.1. The currents in parallel
conductors are almost equal. The total loss (I 2R+circulating current loss)
calculated by the above method based on the multi-winding transformer theory
is 21.882 kW (for all 3 phases) out of which I2R loss is 21.87 kW. Thus, the
circulating current loss is 12 watts, which is just 0.055% of the I 2R loss,
suggesting that the transposition scheme, although not ideal, is good enough to
minimize the circulating current loss. Hence, it can be used for small rating
transformers with low radial fields in windings as mentioned earlier. We had
calculated for the same transformer, the circulating current loss by method of
Rabins and Cogbill as
Pcc=0.0206 Peddy

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

163

Table 4.1 Current distribution in parallel strands

The total eddy loss in LV winding can be found out using equation 4.99.

Hence,
Pcc=0.0206×489.55=10 W
The above answer matches closely with that calculated from the method based on
the theory of multi-winding transformer (12 W).
4.6.3 FEM analysis
As mentioned earlier, the analytical methods which consider only the axial
leakage field are approximate. The effect of radial fields at winding ends or at tap
breaks on the circulating currents cannot be analyzed by these methods. Also, the
effect of circulating currents on the main leakage field is neglected. These effects
are dominant in large power transformers as well as low voltage high current
transformers (e.g., furnace transformers). Hence, for more accurate estimation of
the circulating current loss and for arriving at the correct transposition scheme, a
numerical method such as FEM is used [28,29].
In [29], it has been concluded that in case of windings without any
transpositions or with inadequate transpositions, the analytical formulations give
much higher and inaccurate circulating current losses. This is particularly true
when the number of parallel conductors is more. This is due to the fact that in such
cases, the effect of field due to large circulating currents significantly affects the
leakage field, and this effect is neglected in the analytical formulations.
For FEM analysis, a time-harmonic formulation is used in which each and
every conductor needs to be modeled. It requires quite a good amount of modeling
efforts. The conductors are defined as stranded conductors meaning that the eddy

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

164

Chapter 4

currents in them are neglected. Hence, the loss given by FEM analysis is a total of
the I2R loss and circulating current loss. Let us take a case where the loss is
required to be found in LV winding having a number of parallel conductors. The
impedance voltage is applied to HV winding (which is modeled as one or very few
rectangular block/s with the definition of ampere-turn density for the block/s). In
[30], the circulating currents and the corresponding losses have been calculated
for a continuous disk winding with 12 parallel conductors by using the 2-D FEM
analysis and the analytical method of multi-winding transformers. The
transposition scheme was not the ideal one for this winding. The currents
calculated by both the methods are quite close, which are compared in figure 4.17.
The circulating current losses calculated by the two methods are also close. When
the transposition scheme was changed to the ideal one, in which each of the 12
parallel conductors occupied the position of every other conductor, the load loss
of the transformer reduced by an amount corresponding to the calculated value of
the circulating current loss, thus verifying the results of the calculation by the two
different methods.
In [17,18], 3-D leakage field distribution is obtained by 3-D FEM analysis. The
voltages that circulate the currents between parallel conductors are found out by
integrating the flux density components over three dimensions taking into account
the transpositions between parallel conductors. Based on these voltages and
conductor resistances, circulating currents in the loops are found out from the
simple network solution of the circuit shown in figure 4.18.

Figure 4.17 Circulating currents in continuous disk winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

165

Figure 4.18 Equivalent circuit for calculation of circulating currents

The path of circulating currents is assumed to be resistive because the inductance
between parallel conductors is much smaller on account of adequate
transpositions, small spacing between conductors and one-turn path of circulating
current. It is reported in [17] that a significant reduction in circulating current
losses can be achieved by deciding the correct locations of transpositions based on
such 3-D field calculations.
Till now, we considered only radially placed parallel conductors. There can be
axially placed parallel conductors also. If the radial field is symmetrical at both the
ends and if there are two parallel conductors placed axially as shown in figure 4.19,
the net leakage field enclosed by the loop formed by the two conductors is zero
(since the radial field is in opposite directions at the top and bottom ends of the
winding). Hence, there will not be any circulating currents on account of the radial
field, obviating any need for the transpositions in axial direction for these two
conductors. If the radial field is significantly different at the top and bottom ends, the
axial transpositions (exchange of axial positions) may be required at the predetermined locations (based on FEM analysis). In such cases, the approximate
analytical formulations (which consider only the axial field) cannot be used.

Figure 4.19 Axially placed parallel conductors in a winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

166

Chapter 4

References
1. Stoll, R.L. The analysis of eddy currents, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1974.
2. Hayt, W.H. Engineering electromagnetics, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Singapore, 1989, pp. 336–363.
3. Dexin, X., Yunqiu, T., and Zihong, X. FEM analysis of 3-D eddy current field
in power transformer, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 23, No. 5, May
1987, pp. 3786–3788.
4. Holland, S.A., O’Connell, and G.P., Haydock, L. Calculating stray losses in
power transformers using surface impedance with finite elements, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 1992, pp. 1355–1358.
5. Berezovski, A.A. The calculation of stray losses in transformer tanks,
Elektrichestvo, No. 9, 1966, pp. 1–7.
6. Subbarao, V. Eddy currents in linear and nonlinear media, Omega Scientific
Publishers, New Delhi, 1991.
7. Agarwal, P.D. Eddy current losses in solid and laminated iron, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 78, May 1959, pp. 169–181.
8. Hammond, P. Applied electromagnetism, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1971.
9. Turowski, J., Turowski, M., and Kopec, M. Method of three-dimensional
network solution of leakage field of three-phase transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 26, No. 5, September 1990, pp. 2911–
2919.
10. Bean, R.L., Chackan, N., Moore, H.R., and Wentz, E.C. Transformers for the
electric power industry, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1959, pp.
396–402.
11. Boyajian, A. Leakage reactance of irregular distributions of transformer
windings by method of double Fourier series, AIEE Transactions—Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 73, Pt. III-B, 1954, pp. 1078–1086.
12. Rabins, L. Transformer reactance calculations with digital computers, AIEE
Transactions—Communications and Electronics, Vol. 75, Pt. I, 1956, pp. 261–
267.
13. Andersen, O.W. Transformer leakage flux program based on finite element
method, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-92,
1973, pp. 682–689.
14. Kulkarni, S.V., Gulwadi, G.S., Ramachandran, R., and Bhatia, S. Accurate
estimation of eddy loss in transformer windings by using FEM analysis,
International Conference on Transformers, TRAFOTECH-94, Bangalore, India,
January 1994, pp. 17–110.
15. Kulkarni, S.V. and Ramachandrudu, B. Orthogonal array design of
experiments for analysis of key performance parameter of transformer, First
World Congress on Total Quality Management, Organized by Royal

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Eddy Currents and Winding Stray Losses

167

Statistical Society and Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, U.K., 10–12
April 1995, pp. 201–204.
16. McWhirter, J.H., Oravec, J.J., and Haack, R. Computation of magnetostatic
fields in three dimensions based on Fredholm integral equations, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. MAG-18, No. 2, March 1982, pp. 373–
378.
17. Girgis, R.S., Yannucci, D.A., and Templeton, J.B. Performance parameters of
power transformers using 3D magnetic field calculations, IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-103, No. 9, September 1984, pp.
2708–2713.
18. Girgis, R.S., Scott, D.J., Yannucci, D.A., and Templeton, J.B. Calculation of
winding losses in shell form transformers for improved accuracy and
reliability—Part I: Calculation procedure and program description, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-2, No. 2, April 1987, pp. 398–
410.
19. Kozlowski, M. and Turowski, J. Stray losses and local overheating hazard in
transformers, CIGRE 1972, Paper No. 12–10.
20. Mullineux, N., Reed, J.R., and Whyte, I.J. Current distribution in sheet and
foil wound transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 116, No. 1, January 1969, pp.
127–129.
21. El-Missiry, M.M. Current distribution and leakage impedance of various types
of foil-wound transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 125, No. 10, October 1978,
pp. 987–992.
22. Turowski, J. Additional losses in foil and bar wound transformers, IEEE PES
Winter Meeting and Symposium, New York, January 25–30, 1976, Paper No.
A-76–151–1.
23. Genon, A., Legros, W., Adriaens, J.P., and Nicolet, A. Computation of extra
joule losses in power transformers, ICEM 88, pp. 577–581.
24. Ram, B.S. Loss and current distribution in foil windings of transformers,
Proceedings IEE—Generation, Transmission and Distribution, Vol. 145, No.
6, November 1998, pp. 709–716.
25. Kaul, H.J. Stray current losses in stranded windings of transformers, AIEE
Transactions, June 1957, pp. 137–149.
26. de Buda, R.G. Winding transpositions for electrical apparatus, U.S. Patent
No. 2, 710, 380, June, 1955.
27. Rothe, F.S. An introduction to power system analysis, John Wiley, New York,
1953, pp. 45–50.
28. Isaka, S., Tokumasu, T., and Kondo, K. Finite element analysis of eddy currents
in transformer parallel conductors, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-104, No. 10, October 1985, pp. 2731–2737.
29. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Ghosh, G., Ainapure, S.M., and Bhavsar, J.S.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

168

Chapter 4

Circulating current loss in transformer windings, Proceedings IEE—Science,
Measurement and Technology, Vol. 145, No. 4, July 1998, pp. 136–140.
30. Kulkarni, S.V., Palanivasagam, S., and Yaksh, M. Calculation of circulating
current loss in transformer windings using FE analysis, ANSYS Users
Conference, Pittsburgh, USA, August 27–30, 2000.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

5
Stray Losses in Structural
Components

The previous chapter covered the theory and fundamentals of eddy currents. It
also covered in detail, the estimation and reduction of stray losses in windings,
viz., eddy loss and circulating current loss. This chapter covers estimation of
remaining stray losses, which predominantly consist of stray losses in structural
components. Various countermeasures required for the reduction of these stray
losses and elimination of hot spots are discussed.
The stray loss problem becomes increasingly important with growing
transformer ratings. Ratings of generator transformers and interconnecting autotransformers are steadily increasing over last few decades. Stray losses of such
large units can be appreciably high, which can result in higher temperature rise,
affecting their life. This problem is particularly severe in the case of large autotransformers, where actual impedance on equivalent two-winding rating is higher
giving a very high value of stray leakage field. In the case of large generator
transformers and furnace transformers, stray loss due to high current carrying
leads can become excessive, causing hot spots. To become competitive in the
global marketplace it is necessary to optimize material cost, which usually leads to
reduction in overall size of the transformer as a result of reduction in electrical and
magnetic clearances. This has the effect of further increasing stray losses if
effective shielding measures are not implemented. Size of a large power
transformer is also limited by transportation constraints. Hence, the magnitude of
stray field incident on the structural parts increases much faster with growing
rating of transformers. It is very important for a transformer designer to know and
estimate accurately all the stray loss components because each kW of load loss
may be capitalized by users from US$750 to US$2500. In large transformers, a
reduction of stray loss by even 3 to 5 kW can give a competitive advantage.
169
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

170

Chapter 5

Stray losses in structural components may form a large part (>20%) of the total
load loss if not evaluated and controlled properly. A major part of stray losses
occurs in structural parts with a large area (e.g., tank). Due to inadequate shielding
of these parts, stray losses may increase the load loss of the transformer
substantially, impairing its efficiency. It is important to note that the stray loss in
some clamping elements with smaller area (e.g., flitch plate) is lower, but the
incident field on them can be quite high leading to unacceptable local high
temperature rise seriously affecting the life of the transformer.
Till 1980, a lot of work was done in the area of stray loss evaluation by
analytical methods. These methods have certain limitations and cannot be applied
to complex geometries. With the fast development of numerical methods such as
Finite Element Method (FEM), calculation of eddy loss in various metallic
components of the transformer is now easier and less complicated. Some of the
complex 3-D problems when solved by using 2-D formulations (with major
approximations) lead to significant inaccuracies. Developments of commercial 3D FEM software packages since 1990 have enabled designers to simulate the
complex electromagnetic structure of transformers for control of stray loss and
elimination of hot spots. However, FEM analysis may require considerable
amount of time and efforts. Hence, wherever possible, a transformer designer
would prefer fast analysis with sufficient accuracy so as to enable him to decide on
various countermeasures for stray loss reduction. It may be preferable, for regular
design use, to calculate some of the stray loss components by analytical/hybrid
(analytically numerical) methods or by some formulae derived on the basis of
one-time detailed analysis. Thus, the method of calculation of stray losses should
be judiciously selected; wherever possible, the designer should be given
equations/curves or analytical computer programs providing a quick and
reasonably accurate calculation.
Computation of stray losses is not a simple task because the transformer is a
highly asymmetrical and three-dimensional structure. The computation is
complicated by
-

magnetic non-linearity
difficulty in quick and accurate computation of stray field and its effects
inability in isolating exact stray loss components from tested load loss values
limitations of experimental verification methods for large power transformers

Stray losses in various clamping structures (frame, flitch plate, etc.) and the tank
due to the leakage field emanating from windings and due to the field of high
current carrying leads are discussed in this chapter. The methods used for
estimation of these losses are compared. The effectiveness of various methods
used for stray loss control is discussed. Some interesting phenomena observed
during three-phase and single-phase load loss tests are also reported.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

171

5.1 Factors Influencing Stray Losses
With the increase in ratings of transformers, the proportion of stray losses in the
load loss may increase significantly. These losses in structural components may
exceed the stray losses in windings in large power transformers (especially
autotransformers). A major portion of these stray losses occurs in structural
components with a large area (e.g., tank) and core clamping elements (e.g.,
frames). The high magnitude of stray flux usually does not permit designers to
disregard the non-linear magnetic characteristics of steel elements. Stray losses in
structural steel components depend in a very complicated manner on the
parameters such as the magnitude of stray flux, frequency, resistivity, type of
excitation, etc.
In the absence of hysteresis and non-linearity of magnetic characteristics, the
expression for the eddy loss per unit surface area of a plate, subjected to (on one of
its surfaces) a magnetic field of r.m.s. value (Hrms), has been derived in Chapter 4
as
(5.1)
Hence, the total power loss in a steel plate with a permeability µs can be given in
terms of the peak value of the field (H0) as

(5.2)
This equation assumes a constant permeability. It is necessary to take into account
the non-linear magnetic saturation effect in structural steel parts because their
surfaces are often saturated due to the skin effect. Non-linearity of magnetic
characteristics can be taken into account by a linearization coefficient as explained
in Section 4.4. Thus, the total power loss with the consideration of non-linear
characteristics can be given by

(5.3)
The term al in the above equation is the linearization coefficient. Equation 5.3 is
applicable to a simple geometry of a plate excited by a tangential field on one of its
sides. It assumes that the plate thickness is sufficiently larger than the depth of
penetration (skin depth) so that it becomes a case of infinite half space. For
magnetic steel, as discussed in Section 4.4, the linearization coefficient has been
taken as 1.4 in [1]. For a non-magnetic steel, the value of the coefficient is
1(i.e.,al=1).

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

172

Chapter 5

Figure 5.1 Types of excitation

5.1.1 Type of surface excitation
In transformers, there are predominantly two kinds of surface excitation as shown
in figure 5.1. In case (a), the incident field is tangential (e.g., bushing mounting
plate). In this case, the incident tangential field is directly proportional to the
source current since the strength of the magnetic field (H) on the plate surface can
be determined approximately by the principle of superposition [2]. In case (b), for
estimation of stray losses in the tank due to a leakage field incident on it, only the
normal (radial) component of the incident field ( φ ) can be considered as
proportional to the source current. The relationship between the source current
and the tangential field component is much more complicated. In many analytical
formulations, the loss is calculated based on the tangential components (two
orthogonal components in the plane of plate), which need to be evaluated from the
normal component of the incident field with the help of Maxwell’s equations.
The estimated values of these two tangential field components can be used to
find the resultant tangential component and thereafter the tank loss as per equation
5.3.
Let us use the theory of eddy currents described in Chapter 4 to analyze the
effect of different types of excitation on the stray loss magnitude and distribution.
Consider a structural component as shown in figure 5.2 (similar to that of a
winding conductor of figure 4.5) which is placed in an alternating magnetic field
in the y direction having peak amplitudes of H1 and H2 at its two surfaces. The
structural component can be assumed to be infinitely long in the x direction.
Further, it can be assumed that the current density Jx and magnetic field intensity
Hy are functions of z only. Proceeding in a way similar to that in Section 4.3 and
assuming that the structural component has linear magnetic characteristics, the
diffusion equation is given by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

173

Figure 5.2 Stray loss in a structural component

(5.4)
The solution of this equation is
Hy=C1eγz+C2e-γz

(5.5)

where γ is propagation constant given by equation 4.39, viz. γ=(1+j)/δ, δ being
the depth of penetration or skin depth. Now, for the present case the boundary
conditions are
Hy=H1 at z=+b and Hy=H2 at z=-b

(5.6)

Using these boundary conditions, we can get expressions for the constants as
(5.7)
Substituting these values of constants back into equation 5.5 we get
(5.8)
Since ∇×H=J and J=σE, and only the y component of H and x component of J are
non-zero we get
(5.9)

(5.10)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

174

Chapter 5

In terms of complex vectors, the (time average) power flow per unit area of the
plate (in the x-y plane) can be calculated with the help of Poynting’s theorem [3]:
(5.11)
Substituting the values of Hy and Ex from equations 5.8 and 5.10, the value of eddy
loss per unit area of the plate can be calculated. Figure 5.3 shows the plot of the
normalized value of eddy loss, P/(H2/2σδ), versus the normalised plate thickness
(2b/δ) for three different cases of the tangential surface excitation.
Case 1 (H1=H and H2=0): As expected, the eddy loss for this case decreases with
the increase in plate thickness until the thickness becomes 1 to 2 times the skin
depth. This situation resembles the case in a transformer when a current carrying
conductor is placed parallel to a conducting plate (mild steel tank/ pocket). For
this case (see figure 5.3), the normalised active power approaches unity as the
thickness and hence the ratio 2b/δ increases. This is because it becomes a case
similar to an infinite half space, where the power loss equals H2/(2σδ). It is to be
remembered that H, H1 and H2 denote peak values.

Figure 5.3 Eddy Loss in a structural plate for different surface excitations

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

175

Figure 5.4 Explanation for curves in Figure 5.3

The plot also shows that the active power loss is very high for a thin plate. A
qualitative explanation for this phenomenon can be given with reference to figure
5.4 (a). Consider a contour C shown in the figure. By applying Ampere’s circuital
law on the contour we obtain

(5.12)
Noting that H is only in the y direction with H1=H and H2=0, the equation
simplifies to
HL=I
As the thickness 2b decreases, the same amount of current passes through a
smaller cross section of the plate and thus through a higher resistance, resulting in
more loss.
Case 2 (H1=H2=H): Here, the eddy loss increases with the increase in the plate
thickness. This situation arises in lead terminations/bushing mounting plates,
where a current passes through holes in the metallic plates. In this case, as the
thickness increases, normalized active power loss approaches the value of 2
because, for 2b/δ>>1, the problem reduces to that of two infinite half-spaces, each
excited by the peak value of field (H) on their surfaces. Therefore, the total loss
adds up to 2 per-unit. As the thickness decreases, the active power loss decreases
in contrast with Case 1. As shown in figure 5.4 (b), the currents in two halves of
the plate are in opposite directions (as forced by the boundary conditions of H1
and H2). For a sufficiently small thickness, the effects of these two currents tend to
cancel each other reducing the loss to zero.
Case 3 (H1=-H2=H): Here, the eddy loss decreases with the increase in thickness.
For very high thickness (much greater than the skin depth), the loss approaches
the value corresponding to two infinite half-spaces, i.e., H2/(σδ). As the thickness
decreases, the power loss approaches very high values. For the representation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

176

Chapter 5

given in figure 5.4 (c), an explanation similar to that for Case 1 can be given. The
application of Ampere’s circuital law gives double the value of current (i.e.,
2HL=I) as compared to Case 1. Hence, as the thickness (2b) decreases, the current
has to pass through a smaller cross section of the plate and thus through a higher
resistance causing more loss.
In the previous three cases, it is assumed that the incident magnetic field
intensity is tangential to the surface of a structural component (e.g., bushing
mounting plate). If the field is incident radially, the behavior of stray loss is
different. Based on a number of 2-D FEM simulations involving a configuration in
which the leakage field from the windings is radially incident on a structural
component (e.g., tank or flitch plate), the typical curves are presented in figure
5.5. The figure gives the variation of loss in a structural component as the
thickness is increased, for three different types of material: magnetic steel, nonmagnetic steel and aluminum. The curves are similar to those given in [4] wherein
a general formulation is given for the estimation of losses in a structural
component for any kind of spatial distribution of the incident magnetic field.
Let us now analyse the graphs of three different types of materials given in
figure 5.5.

Figure 5.5 Loss in different materials for radial excitation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

177

1) Magnetic steel: One can assume that the magnetic steel plate is saturated due to
its small skin depth. Hence, the value of relative permeability corresponding to the
saturation condition is taken (µr=100). With σ=7×106mho/m, we get the value of
skin depth as 2.69 mm at 50 Hz. It can be seen from the graph that the power loss
value reaches a maximum in about two skin depths and thereafter remains
constant. This behavior is in line with the theory of eddy currents and skin depth
elaborated in Chapter 4. Since eddy currents and losses are concentrated at the
surface only, increasing the plate thickness beyond few skin depths does not
change the effective resistance offered to the eddy currents and hence the loss
remains constant (at a value which is governed by equation 4.74).
2) Aluminum: In case of aluminum with µr=1 and σ=29×106mho/m, the skin
depth at 50 Hz is 13.2 mm. It can be observed from the graph that the loss first
increases with thickness and then reduces. The phenomenon can be analyzed
qualitatively from the supply end as an equivalent resistive-inductive circuit. For
small thickness (thin plates), it becomes a case of resistance-limited behavior (as
discussed in Section 4.5.1) and the effective resistance is larger compared to the
inductance. Hence, the equivalent circuit behaves as a predominantly resistive
circuit, for which the loss can be given as P=(V2/R), where V is the supply voltage.
An increase of the thickness of the aluminum plate leads to a decrease of
resistance, due to the increased cross section available for the eddy-currents, and
hence the loss increases. This is reflected in a near-linear increase in losses with
the increase of plate thickness.
Upon further increase of the plate thickness, the resistance continues to
decrease while the inductance gradually increases, and the circuit behavior
changes gradually from that of a purely resistive one to that of a series R–L circuit.
The power loss undergoes a peak, and starts to decrease as the circuit becomes
more inductive. Finally, when the thickness is near or beyond the skin depth, the
field and eddy currents are almost entirely governed by the inductive effects
(inductance-limited behavior). The field does not penetrate any further when the
plate thickness is increased. The equivalent resistance and inductance of the
circuit become independent of the increase in the plate thickness. The power loss
also approaches a constant value as the thickness increases significantly more than
the skin depth making it a case of infinite half space. Since the product (σ·δ) is
much higher for the aluminum plate than that for the mild steel plate, the constant
(minimum) value of loss for the former is much lower (the loss is inversely
proportional to the product (σ·δ) as per equation 4.74). The curves of aluminum
and mild steel intersect at about 3 mm (point A).
3) Non-magnetic stainless steel: For the non-magnetic steel plate, the behavior is
similar to that of the aluminum plate, both being non-magnetic materials. The
curve is more flat as compared to aluminum as the skin depth of stainless steel is
quite high. For a typical grade of stainless steel material with relative permeability
of 1 and conductivity of 1.136×106 mho/m, the skin depth is 66.78 mm at 50 Hz.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

178

Chapter 5

Another difference is that as the thickness is increased, loss approaches a constant
value higher than the aluminum plate but lower than the magnetic steel plate since
the product (σ·δ) for stainless steel lies between that of mild steel and aluminum.
The intersection point (B) of the curves for stainless steel and aluminum occurs at
about 5 mm and the intersection point (C) of the curves for stainless steel and mild
steel occurs at about 10 mm. The location of intersection points depends on the
configuration being analyzed and the nature of the incident field.
With the increase in the plate thickness, the values of losses in the mild steel
(MS), aluminum (AL) and stainless steel (SS) plates stabilize to 12.2 kW/m, 1.5
kW/m and 5.7 kW/m respectively for particular values of currents in the windings.
For large thickness, it becomes a case of infinite half space and the three loss
values should actually be in proportion to (1/σδ) for the same value of tangential
component of magnetic field intensity (H0) on the surface of the plate (as per
equation 4.74). The magnitude and nature of eddy currents induced in these three
types of plates are different, which makes the value of H0 different for these cases.
Also, the value of H0 is not constant along the surface (as observed from the FEM
analysis). Hence, the losses in the three materials are not in the exact proportion of
their corresponding ratios (1/σδ). Nevertheless, the expected trend is there; the
losses follow the relationship (loss) MS>(loss) SS>(loss) AL since (1/ σδ) MS>(l/
σδ)SS>(1/σδ)AL.
A few general conclusions can be drawn based on the above discussion:
1) When a plate made of non-magnetic and highly conductive material (aluminum
or copper) is used in the vicinity of field due to high currents or leakage field from
windings, it should have thickness at least comparable to its skin depth (13.2 mm
for aluminum and 10.3 mm for copper at 50 Hz) to reduce the loss in it to a low
value. For the field due to a high current, the minimum value of loss is obtained for
a thickness of [5],

(5.13)
For aluminum (with δ=13.2 mm), we get the value of tmin as 20.7 mm at 50 Hz. The
ratio tmin/δ corresponding to the minimum loss value is 1.57. This agrees with the
graph of figure 5.3 corresponding to Case 1 (assuming that tangential field value
H2 ≅0 which is a reasonable assumption for a thickness 50% more than δ), in
which the minimum loss is obtained for the normalized thickness of 1.57. For the
case of radial incident field also (figure 5.5), the loss reaches a minimum value at
the thickness of about 20 mm. For t<(0.5×δ), the loss becomes substantial and
may lead to overheating of the plate. Hence, if aluminum or copper is used as an
electromagnetic (eddy current) shield, then it should have sufficient thickness to
eliminate its overheating and minimize the stray loss in the structural component

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

179

(shielded by it). Sufficient thickness of a shield ensures that its effective resistance
is close to the minimum value.
2) Since the skin depth of mild steel (2.69 mm) is usually much less than the
thickness required from mechanical design considerations, one may not be able to
change its thickness to control the eddy loss. Hence, either magnetic shunts (made
of low reluctance steel material) or electromagnetic shields (aluminum or copper)
are used to minimize the stray losses in structural components made of mild steel
material in medium and large transformers.
3) From figure 5.5, it is clear that the loss in a stainless steel plate is less than a
mild steel plate for lower values of thickness. Hence, when a structural component
is made of stainless steel, its thickness should be as small as possible (permitted
from mechanical design considerations) in order to get a lower loss value. Thus, if
a mild steel flitch plate is replaced by a stainless steel one, the stray loss in it is
lower only if its thickness is about 10 mm or lower.
5.1.2 Effect of load, temperature and frequency
Generally, it is expected that the load loss test is conducted at the rated current. For
large power transformers the tested load loss value at a lower current when
extrapolated to the rated condition in the square proportion of currents may result
in a value less than the actual one. This is because the stray losses in structural
components, which form an appreciable part of the total load loss in large power
transformers, may increase more than the square proportion. With the increase in
winding currents and leakage field values, saturation effects in the (mild steel)
material used for structural components increase. If magnetic or electromagnetic
shield is not adequately designed, it becomes less effective at higher currents
increasing stray losses. The exponent of current for stray losses may even be of the
order of 2.3 to 2.5 instead of 2 in such cases [2]. Hence, depending upon the
proportion of stray losses in the total load loss, the latter will be higher than that
extrapolated with the exponent of 2. Hence, it is preferable to do the load loss test
at the rated current for large transformers. If the test plant is having some
limitation, the test can be done at a current less than the rated value subject to the
agreement between user and manufacturer.
It should be noted that equation 5.2 or 5.3 can be used for a plate excited by a
tangential field on one side, the plate thickness being sufficiently larger than the
skin depth so that it becomes a case of infinite half space. By using an analytical
approximation for the magnetization curves of a commonly used mild steel
material, equation 5.2 or 5.3 for the power loss per unit surface area in a massive
steel element subjected to a tangential field of H0 at the surface, can be rewritten in
terms of the source current I as [6]
(5.14)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

180

Chapter 5

The above equation is valid when H0 is proportional to I, which is true for example
in the case of bushing mounting plates. The current exponent of 1.5 is reported in
[4] for the loss in bushing mounting plates.
For stray losses in magnetic steel plates subjected to the field of high current
carrying bars (leads), the exponent of current is slightly less than 2. The exponent
is a function of distance between the bar and the plate [7] (=1.975-0.154log10 h,
where h is distance from center of bar to plate surface in inches). For aluminum
plates, the current exponent can be taken as 2 [7,8].
The power loss per unit area for an incident flux
which is radial in nature
(incident normally on the plate), is given by [6]
(5.15)
Equation 5.15 is applicable to the case of tank plate subjected to the stray leakage
field emanating from windings. The inter-winding gap flux is proportional to the
current in windings. It has been reported [9] that in the case of tank plate being
penetrated by a part of stray (leakage) field originating from windings, the relation
between this radial field and the winding current is
(5.16)
where κ is in the range of 0.8 to 0.9. Hence, equation 5.15 can be re-written in terms
of current as
(5.17)
where η, the exponent of current, is in the range of 2.2 to 2.5, which is in line with
the value of 2.3 given in [2]. Hence, some stray loss components increase with the
load current having an exponent greater than 2. Since these losses generally do not
form the major part of load losses (if adequate shielding is done) and other stray
losses vary with the current exponent of 2 or less than 2, the load loss dependence
on the current is not much different than the square proportion. This is particularly
true when the load loss test is done at or below the rated currents. Under
overloading conditions, however, the load loss may increase with the current
having an exponent higher than 2.
Losses due to high current field (e.g., in bushing mounting plate) vary in direct
proportion of
as per equation 5.14. From equation 5.17, it is clear that the
stray losses in tank vary in almost the inverse proportion of resistivity and square
proportion of frequency. Since the eddy losses in windings are also inversely
proportional to resistivity (see equation 4.94), the total stray losses may be
assumed to vary in the inverse proportion of resistivity (because the winding eddy
losses and tank stray losses form the major part of stray losses for most of the
transformers). For simplicity in calculations, they are assumed to be varying in the
inverse proportion of the resistivity of winding conductor. Thus, the total stray
losses in transformers can be related to resistivity as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

181
(5.18)

Since metals have positive temperature coefficient of resistance (resistivity
increases with temperature), the stray losses can be taken to vary in the inverse
proportion of temperature. If the load loss is guaranteed at 75°C, the stray loss
component of the measured load loss at temperature tm is converted to 75°C by the
formula (when the copper conductor is used in windings)
(5.19)
For aluminum conductor the constant 235 is replaced by 225. Contrary to stray
losses, the DC I2R loss in windings varies in direction proportion of resistivity and
hence the temperature. Therefore, for the copper conductor,
(5.20)
The I2R loss at tm (obtained by converting the value of I2R loss corresponding to
DC resistance test done at temperature tr to temperature tm) is subtracted from the
measured value of load loss at tm to calculate Pstray_tm. In order to calculate I2R loss
at tm, the average winding temperature should be accurately determined. This is
done by taking the average of top and bottom cooler temperatures. A substantial
error may occur if, after oil processing and filtration cycles at about 50 to 60°C, a
sufficient time is not provided for oil to settle down to a lower temperature (close
to ambient temperature). In such a case, the temperature of windings may be quite
different than the average of top and bottom cooler temperatures. Hence, it is
preferable to wait till the oil temperature settles as close to the ambient
temperature or till the difference between the top and bottom oil temperatures is
small enough (the difference should not exceed 5°C as per ANSI Standard
C57.12.90–1993) for accurate measurements. For the forced oil cooling system, a
pump may be used to mix the oil to minimize the difference between top and
bottom oil temperatures.
Regarding the effect of frequency variation on the total stray losses, it can be
said that since the eddy loss in windings is proportional to the square of frequency,
the stray loss in tank is proportional to frequency with an exponent less than 2 as
per equation 5.17, and the stray loss due to the field of high current varies with f0.5
as per equation 5.14, the total stray loss varies with frequency with an exponent x,
whose value depends on the proportion of these losses in the total stray loss.
(5.21)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

182

Chapter 5

If the winding eddy loss and stray losses in all structural components are treated
separately, the winding eddy loss (stray loss in windings) is taken to be varying
with frequency in the square proportion, whereas remaining stray losses can be
assumed to vary with frequency having an exponent close to 1. According to IEC
61378 Part-1, 1997, Transformers for industrial applications, the winding eddy
losses are assumed to depend on frequency with the exponent of 2, whereas stray
losses in structural parts are assumed to vary with frequency with the exponent of
0.8. The frequency conversion factors for various stray loss components are
reported and analyzed in [10].
For a transformer subjected to a non-sinusoidal duty, at higher frequencies the
skin depth is lower than the thickness of the winding conductor. Hence, the
relationship given by equation 4.90 or 5.1 is more valid (frequency exponent of
0.5) instead of that given by equation 4.94 (frequency exponent of 2 when
thickness is less than the skin depth). Therefore, at higher frequencies the
frequency exponent for the winding eddy loss reduces from 2 to a lower value
[11].

5.2 Overview of Methods for Stray Loss Estimation [12]
After having seen basic theory of stray loss in structural components, we will now
take a look at how methods of computation of stray losses have evolved from
approximate 2-D analytical methods to present day advanced 3-D numerical
methods.
5.2.1 Two-dimensional methods
A method is given in [13] for estimating leakage field, in which any kind of
current density distribution can be resolved into space harmonics by a double
Fourier series. The leakage field distribution obtained in the core window by this
method can be used to calculate the approximate value of losses in flitch plate and
first step of the core (in addition to eddy loss in windings). A two-dimensional
Axisymmetric finite element formulation based on magnetic vector potential is
used in [14] to obtain the tank losses. A computer program based on 2-D FEM
formulation for skin effect and eddy current problems is presented in [15]. The
formulation is suitable for both Cartesian and Axisymmetric 2-D problems. In
[16], analogy between magnetic field equations for 2-D Cartesian and
Axisymmetric problems is presented, and usefulness of this analogy for numerical
calculations has been elaborated. The relation between finite element and finite
difference methods is also clarified. Results of measurement of flux densities and
eddy currents on a 150 MVA experimental transformer are reported. In [17], a 2D finite element formulation based on magnetic vector potential is presented,
which takes into account the varying distance between the winding and tank (due
to 3-D geometry) by a correction factor. The 2-D FEM is used to get a static
magnetic field solution in [18], and losses in tank are calculated by analytical

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

183

formulae. The paper has reported test results of tank losses with magnetic and
eddy current shielding. The geometric parameters affecting tank losses are
explained through graphs. The need is emphasized in [19] for analyzing the stray
losses as a complete system and not on an individual component basis. For
example, placement of magnetic shunts on tank surface has the effect of reducing
stray losses in clamping elements of the core since the leakage field gets more
oriented towards the tank. The magnetic tank shunts also increase the radial field
at the ends of outer winding and may increase the winding eddy loss if the width
of its conductor is high enough to compensate the reduction in eddy loss due to
reduced axial field at the ends. A number of 2-D FEM simulations are done to
understand the effect of tank shields (magnetic/eddy current) on the other stray
loss components (winding, flitch plate, frame and core edge losses). The
simulations have shown that the effectiveness of magnetic shunts is quite
dependent on the permeability of material indicating that the magnetic shunts
should have adequate thickness so that their permeability does not reduce due to
saturation.
In this era of 3-D calculations, 2-D methods are preferred for routine
calculations of stray losses. These 2-D methods can be integrated into transformer
design optimization programs which need reasonably accurate determination of
stray losses.
5.2.2 Three-dimensional analytical formulations
A quasi 3-D formulation is given in [20], which obtains the radial flux density
distribution on the tank wall by using method of images. The calculation of flux
density does not consider the effect of the tank eddy currents on the incident field.
This assumption is made to simplify the analytical formulation. From this radially
incident peak value of the flux density (say in the z direction), the tangential
components of magnetic field intensity (Hx and Hy) are calculated from Maxwell’s
equations. The resultant peak value is used
to calculate the
power loss per unit area with the assumption of step-magnetization characteristics
(similar to the theory given in Section 4.4). The total losses in the tank are
calculated by integration carried over the entire area. The method given in [21]
calculates 3-D magnetic flux density distribution on the tank wall using a 2-D
solution for one phase of a three-phase transformer.
These analytical methods may not get easily applied to complicated tank
shapes and for finding the effects of tank shielding accurately. For such cases 3-D
numerical methods are commonly used.
5.2.3 Three-dimensional numerical methods
Advent of high speed and large memory computers has made possible the
application of numerical methods such as FEM, Finite Difference Method,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

184

Chapter 5

Boundary Element Method, etc., for the calculation of 3-D fields inside a
transformer and accurate estimation of stray losses in structural components.
Boundary Element Method (BEM) is more suitable for open boundary
problems involving structural parts of non-magnetic stainless steel, where it is
difficult to determine the boundary conditions [22,23]. For such open boundary
conditions, some researchers have used [24] Integral Equation Method (IEM). In
order to make the grid (mesh) generation easier, IEM with surface impedance
modeling is proposed in [25]. Improved T-⍀ (electric vector potential-magnetic
scalar potential) formulation is used in [26], wherein the total problem region is
divided into source, non-conductive and conductive regions simplifying
computational efforts.
An overview of methods for eddy current analysis is presented in [27]. The
paper compares methods based on differential formulation (analytical, finite
difference method, reluctance network method), integral formulation (volume
integral, boundary element method), and variational methods (weighted residual,
FEM) on attributes such as accuracy, ease of use, practicality and flexibility. The
advantages of BEM for transient and open boundary problems are enumerated in
the paper. There is continuous ongoing development in 3-D numerical
formulations (which started gaining importance in 1980s) to improve their
modeling capabilities and accuracy for the analysis of eddy currents.
After having seen the different approaches for the calculation of stray losses,
we will now discuss in detail each stray loss component and its control.

5.3 Core Edge Loss
Core edge loss is the stray loss occurring due to flux impinging normally
(radially) on core laminations. The amount and path of leakage field in the core
depends on the relative reluctances of the alternative magnetic circuits. Load
conditions of the transformer also have significant influence; the phase angle
between the leakage field and magnetizing field decides the loading of the
magnetic circuit and the total core losses during operation at site. During factory
tests, the leakage flux path in the core depends largely on whether the inner or
outer winding is short-circuited as explained in Section 5.12.2. The incident
leakage flux density on the limb and clamping elements is quite appreciable in
case of generator transformers due to relative closeness of the limb from the interwinding gap as compared to autotransformers. Hence, there are more possibilities
of hot spots being generated in these parts in generator transformers. However, the
stray loss magnitude may be of the same order in generator transformers and
autotransformers due to more leakage field in autotransformers on equivalent two
winding basis.
In large transformers, the radially incident flux may cause considerable eddy
currents to flow in the core laminations resulting in local hot spots. The flux
penetration phenomenon is quite different in a laminated core structure as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

185

compared to a solid one. In a solid block of finite dimensions, the eddy currents
tending to concentrate at the edges can complete their path through the side faces,
and the field is confined to the surface (skin depth) in all faces. In the laminated
case, there is restriction to the flow of eddy currents and the field penetrates much
deeper as compared to the solid case. The leakage flux penetration into the
laminated core poses an anisotropic and three-dimensional non-linear field
problem. The problem is formulated in terms of electric vector potential and
magnetic scalar potential (T-Ω formulation) in [28]. The solution is expressed in
the form of three different characteristic modes, two associated with the core
surfaces and the third describing the flux penetration into the interior. All the three
modes are represented in a network model by complex impedances, and then the
current distribution and losses are derived from the solution of the network. The
core discontinuities (holes) are accounted by change of appropriate impedances.
Thus, the method provides a means of studying effects of core steps, holes, ducts
and discontinuities (due to lapped joints). The network has to be modified with
any change in the geometry or type of excitation. The formulation in the paper has
been verified on two experimental models of a core [29,30]. Approximate
formulae for finding the loss and temperature rise of a core due to an incident field
are also given. The effect of type of flitch plate (magnetic or non-magnetic) on the
core edge loss is also explained. A non-magnetic (stainless steel) flitch plate
increases the core edge loss since it allows (due to its higher skin depth) the flux to
penetrate through it to impinge on the laminations. Hence, although the use of
non-magnetic flitch plate may reduce the loss in it (assuming that its thickness is
sufficiently small as explained in Section 5.1.1), the core edge loss is generally
increased.
The first step of the core is usually slit into two or three parts to reduce the core
edge loss in large transformers. If the stack height of the first step of the core is less
than about 12 mm, slitting may have to be done for the next step also. The use of
a laminated flitch plate for large generator transformers and autotransformers is
preferable since it also acts as a magnetic shunt (as described in Section 5.5).
The evaluation of exact stray loss in the core poses a challenge to transformer
designers. With the developments in 3-D FEM formulations with features of
anisotropic modeling (of permeability and conductivity), the computational
difficulties can be overcome now.

5.4 Stray Loss in Frames
Frames (also called as yoke beams), serving to clamp yokes and support windings,
are in vicinity of stray magnetic field of windings. Due to their large surface area
and efficient cooling, hot spots seldom develop in them. The stray loss in frames
has been calculated by Finite Difference Method and an analytical method in [31].
The loss in frames made up of mild steel, aluminum and non-magnetic steel are
compared. It has been shown that the losses in frame and tank have mutual effect

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

186

Chapter 5

on each other. Non-magnetic steel is not recommended as a material for frames. It
is expensive, difficult to machine and stray losses will be lower only if its
thickness is sufficiently small. A quick and reasonably accurate calculation of the
frame loss can be done by using 3-D Reluctance Network Method (RNM) [32].
The numerical methods such as FEM are also commonly used.
The loss in frames due to leakage field can be reduced by either aluminum
shielding or by use of non-metallic platforms for supporting the windings. In
distribution transformers, the stray loss in the tank may not be much since the
value of leakage field is low. But the loss in frames due to currents in low voltage
leads running parallel to them can be significant. For example, the current of a star
connected LV winding of a 2 MVA, 11/0.433 kV transformer is 2666.67 A, which
can result into stray loss in the frames of the order 1 kW (which is substantial for
a 2 MVA transformer). Non-metallic frames can be used (after thorough
assessment of their short circuit withstand capability) for eliminating the stray
loss.
Another way of minimizing this loss is by having go and return arrangement of
LV winding leads passing close to the frame. These two leads can be either firmly
supported from the frame or they can pass through a hole made in the frame as
shown in figure 5.6. The net field responsible for eddy current losses in the
metallic frame is negligible as the two currents are in opposite directions.
A single lead may be allowed to pass through a hole in the frame with a nonmagnetic insert (e.g., stainless steel material with high resistivity) as shown in
figure 5.7 upto a certain value of current.
In power transformers, sometimes a frame of non-magnetic material (stainless
steel) is used. As explained in Section 5.1.1, its thickness should be as small as
mechanically possible; otherwise its loss may exceed the corresponding value for
frame made of (magnetic) mild steel material.

Figure 5.6 Go and return arrangement

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Figure 5.7 Non-magnetic insert

Stray Losses in Structural Components

187

Figure 5.8 Types of flitch plates

5.5 Stray Loss in Flitch Plates
Stray flux departing radially through the inner surface of windings hits fittings
such as flitch plates mounted on the core. On the surface of the flitch plate (lying
on the outermost core-step of limbs for holding core laminations together
vertically), the stray flux density may be much higher than that on the tank. Hence,
although the losses occurring in a flitch plate may not form a significant part of the
total load loss of a transformer, the local temperature rise can be much higher due
to high value of incident flux density and poorer cooling conditions. The loss
density may attain levels that may lead to a hazardous local temperature rise if the
material and type of flitch plate are not selected properly. The higher temperature
rise can cause deterioration of insulation in the vicinity of flitch plate, thereby
seriously affecting the transformer life.
There are a variety of flitch plate designs being used in power transformers as
shown in figure 5.8. For small transformers, mild steel flitch plate without any
slots is generally used because the incident field is not large enough to cause hot
spots. As the incident field increases in larger transformers, a plate with slots at the
top and bottom ends can be used (where the incident leakage field is higher).
Sometimes, flitch plates are provided with slots in the part corresponding to the
tap zone in taps-in-body designs. These slots of limited length may be adequate if
the incident field on the flitch plates is not high. Fully slotted plates are even
better, but they are weak mechanically, and their manufacturing process is a bit
more complicated. The plates can be made of non-magnetic stainless steel having
high resistivity only if their thickness is small as explained in Section 5.1.1. When
the incident leakage field on the flitch plate is very high, as in large generator
transformers, the best option would be to use a laminated flitch plate. It consists of
a stack of CRGO laminations, which are usually held together by epoxy molding
to make the assembly mechanically strong. The top and bottom ends of
laminations are welded to solid (non-magnetic) steel pads which are then locked

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

188

Chapter 5

to the frames. A laminated flitch plate not only minimizes its own eddy loss but it
also acts as a magnetic shunt reducing the loss in the first step of the core.
The literature available on the analysis of flitch plate loss is quite scarce. An
approximate but practical method for calculation of the loss and temperature rise of
a flitch plate is given in [4], which makes certain approximations based on the
experimental data given in [33]. The field strength at the inner edge of LV winding
is assumed to vary periodically with a sinusoidal distribution in the space along the
height of the winding, and the non-sinusoidal nature is accounted by multiplying
the loss by a factor. The eddy current reaction is neglected in this analytical
formulation. For a fully slotted flitch plate, the formulation is modified by considering
that the plate is split into distinct parts. A more accurate 2-D/3-D FEM analysis is
reported in [34], in which many limitations of analytical formulations are overcome.
The paper describes details of statistical analysis, orthogonal array design of
experiments, used in conjunction with 2-D FEM for quantifying the effect of various
factors influencing the flitch plate loss. This Section contains results of authors’
paper [34] © 1999 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from IEEE Transactions on
Power Delivery, Vol. 14, No. 3, July 1999, pp. 996–1001. The dependence of flitch
plate loss on the axial length of windings, core-LV gap, winding to yoke clearance
and LV-HV gap is observed to be high. The flitch plate loss varies almost linearly
with LV-HV gap. A quadratic surface derived by multiple regression analysis can
be used by designers for a quick but approximate estimation of the flitch plate loss.
The loss value obtained can be used to decide type (with slots/without slots) and
material (magnetic mild steel/non-magnetic stainless steel) of the flitch plate to control
its loss and avoid hot spots. The effectiveness of number and length of slots in reducing
losses can be ascertained accurately by 3-D field calculations. In the paper, in-depth
analysis of eddy current paths has been reported for slotted mild steel and stainless
steel flitch plates, having dimensions of 1535 mm×200 mm×12 mm, used in a singlephase 33 MVA, 220/132/11 kV autotransformer.
For this analysis, a mild steel (MS) flitch plate with µr=1000 and σ= 4×106
mho/m has been studied. The corresponding skin depth is 1.1 mm at 50 Hz. The
results obtained are summarized in table 5.1. The loss values shown are for one
fourth of the complete plate.
Table 5.1 Loss in MS flitch plate

Case number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Description
No slots
1 slot throughout
3 slots throughout
7 slots throughout
1 slot of 400mm length
3 slots of 400mm length
7 slots of 400mm length

Loss in watts
120
92
45
32
100
52
45

Stray Losses in Structural Components

189

Figure 5.9 Eddy currents in MS plate with no slots

The loss for the ‘7 slots throughout’ case is approximately 4 times less than that
of the ‘no slots’ case. Theoretically, the loss is proportional to the square of width,
hence for n slots, the loss should reduce approximately by a factor of (n+1), i.e., 8
(if a plate width of 3w is divided by 2 slots into 3 plates of width w, then loss will
theoretically reduce by a factor of (3w)2 divided by 3w2, i.e., 3). The reason for this
discrepancy can be explained as follows. The pattern of eddy currents is complex
in a mild steel material. Eddy loss in it has two components, viz. loss due to radial
incident field, and the other due to axial field (the incident radial flux changes its
direction immediately once it penetrates inside the plate due to very small skin
depth). This phenomenon is evident from the eddy current pattern in the plate
cross section, taken at 0.5 mm from the surface facing the windings (figure 5.9 and
figure 5.10). There is hardly any change in the eddy current pattern in this cross
section after the introduction of slots. The direction of eddy currents suggests the
predominance of axial field at 0.5 mm from the surface. Hence, there are eddy
current loops in the thickness of the plate as shown in figure 5.11. These are the
reasons for the ineffectiveness of slots in the MS plate, which is responsible for the
fact that the reduction of losses is not by a factor of 8.

Figure 5.10 Eddy currents in MS plate with 3 slots

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

190

Chapter 5

Figure 5.11 Eddy currents across thickness of MS plate with 3 slots

For a non-magnetic stainless steel (SS) flitch plate (µr=1, σ=1.13×106 mho/m),
due to its large penetration depth (67 mm at 50 Hz), the incident field penetrates
through it and hits the core laminations. This phenomenon is evident from the
eddy current pattern at the plate cross section taken at 0.5 mm from the surface
(figures 5.12 and 5.13). There is an appreciable distortion in the eddy current
pattern after the introduction of slots.

Figure 5.12 Eddy currents in SS plate with no slots

Figure 5.13 Eddy currents in SS plate with 3 slots

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

191

Figure 5.14 Eddy currents across thickness in SS plate with 3 slots

The direction of eddy currents indicates the predominance of radial field at the
cross section, 0.5 mm from the surface. There are no eddy current loops in
thickness of the plate (see figure 5.14). These are the reasons for the effectiveness
of slots in the SS plate. The eddy current loops are parallel to the surface (on which
the flux in incident) indicating that the eddy loss in the SS plate is predominantly
due to the radial field. Hence, the slots in the SS plate are more effective as
compared to the MS plate. This means that the loss should reduce approximately
by a factor of (n+1). From the first two results given in table 5.2, we see that the
reduction in the loss is more (12 times) than expected (8 times). This may be due
to fact that each slot is 5 mm wide causing a further reduction in the loss due to the
reduced area of conduction.
Due to higher resistivity of SS, the losses in the SS plate are lower than the MS
plate. If results from tables 5.1 and 5.2 are compared for the ‘no slots’ case, it can
be seen that the SS plate loss is not significantly lower than the MS plate loss for
12 mm thickness. For a higher thickness, the loss in the SS plate may exceed the
loss in the MS plate, which is in line with the graphs in figure 5.5. It shows that in
order to get lower losses with SS material, its thickness should be as small as
possible with due considerations to mechanical design requirements. With the SS
plate, shielding effect is not available. Hence, although losses in the flitch plate are
reduced with SS material, the stray loss in the first step of the core may increase
substantially if it is not split. Therefore, thicker flitch plates with a low incident
flux density should be of MS material.
A laminated flitch plate (consisting of M4 grade CRGO laminations) has also
been analyzed through 3-D FEM analysis by taking anisotropy into account. The
direction along the flitch plate length is defined as soft direction and other two
directions are defined as hard directions. The loss value obtained for the laminated
flitch plate is just 2.5 watts, which is quite lower than the SS plate. Hence,
laminated flitch plates are generally used for large power transformers,
particularly generator transformers, where the incident flux density is quite high.
Table 5.2 Losses in SS flitch plate

Case Number
1
2
3
4

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Description
No slots
7 slots throughout
7 slots 400 mm long
3 slots 400 mm long

Loss in watts
98
8
11
17

192

Chapter 5

The eddy loss distribution obtained by 3-D FEM electromagnetic analysis is
used for estimation of the temperature rise of the flitch plate by 3-D FEM thermal
analysis [34,35]. The heat generation rates (watts/m3) for various zones of the
flitch plate are obtained from the 3-D FEM electromagnetic analysis. The
computed temperatures have been found to be in good agreement with that
obtained by measurements. Thus, the method of combined 3-D electromagnetic
FEM analysis and thermal FEM analysis can be used for the analysis of eddy loss
and temperature rise of a flitch plate. Nowadays, commercial FEM software
packages are available having multi-physics capability. Hence, the temperature
rise can be found more easily without manual interface between the
electromagnetic FEM analysis and thermal FEM analysis.

5.6 Stray Loss in Tank
The tank stray loss forms a major part of the total stray loss in large power
transformers. Stray flux departing radially from the outer surface of winding gives
rise to eddy current losses in transformer tank walls. Though the stray flux density
in the tank wall is low, the tank loss may be high due to its large area. Hot spots
seldom develop in the tank, since the heat is carried away by the oil. A good
thermal conductivity of the tank material also helps to mitigate hot spots. The
stray loss in tank is controlled by magnetic/eddy current shields.
Methods for estimation of tank loss have evolved from approximate analytical
methods to present day more accurate three-dimensional numerical methods. The
radial incident flux density at various points on the tank is found in [36] by
neglecting the effect of eddy currents on the incident field. It is assumed that the
ampere-turns of windings are concentrated at the longitudinal center of each
winding as a current sheet, and the field at any point on the tank is calculated by
superimposition of the fields due to all windings. The tank loss is calculated using
the estimated value of the radial field at each point. The analytical formulation in
[37] determines the field in air without the presence of tank, from the construction
of the transformer and the currents in windings. Based on this field and the
coefficient of transmission, the tangential component of the magnetic field
strength on the inner surface of the tank is determined. The specific power loss at
a point is then calculated by using the value of active surface resistance of the tank
material. The total losses are determined by summing the specific losses on the
surface of the tank. The analytical method, presented in [38], takes into account
the hysteresis and non-linearity by using complex permeability. A current sheet,
the sum of trigonometric functions in between the core and tank (both treated as
infinite half space), represents mmf of windings. The calculated value of the radial
component of the flux density at the tank surface is corrected by a coefficient
accounting for the influence of eddy currents. The tank loss is found by Poynting’s
vector. The method can be applied for a specific tank shape only. The effect of
magnetic/eddy current shields on the tank wall is not accounted in the method.
The analytical approach in [39] expresses the incident flux density (obtained by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

193

any method) on the tank in terms of double Fourier series. Subsequently, after
getting the field and eddy current distribution within the tank plate, the loss is
evaluated by using volume integral. The results are verified by an experimental
set-up in which a semi-circular electromagnet is used to simulate the radial
incident field on the tank plate.
Thus, since the 1960s the research reported for calculation of tank loss has
been mainly concentrating on various analytical methods involving intricate
formulations, which approximate the three-dimensional transformer geometry to
simplify the calculations. Transformer designers prefer fast interactive design
with sufficient accuracy to enable them to decide the method for reducing tank
stray losses. Reluctance Network Method [1] can fulfill the requirements of very
fast estimation and control of the tank stray loss. It is based on a three-dimensional
network of reluctances. The reluctances are calculated from various geometrical
dimensions and electrical parameters of the transformer. There are two kinds of
elements: magnetic resistances for non-conductive areas and magnetic
impedances for conductive parts. The first ones are calculated purely from the
geometrical dimensions of the elements, whereas the latter ones take into account
analytically the skin effect, eddy current reactions with phase shift, non-linear
permeability inside solid metals, and the effect of eddy current shields (if placed
on the tank wall). Hence, the method is a hybrid method in which the analytical
approach is used (for the portion of the geometry involving eddy currents) in
conjunction with the numerical formulation.
The equivalent reluctance of the solid iron can be determined with the help of
the theory of eddy currents explained in Chapter 4. For a magnetic field applied on
the surface of solid iron in the y direction, and assuming that it is function of z only
(figure 5.15), the amplitude of flux per unit length in the x direction is

(5.22)

Figure 5.15 Equivalent reluctance for tank

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

194

Chapter 5

In line with Section 4.3, for the peak value of the magnetic field intensity (H0) at
the surface, we can write from equation 4.68 for linear B-H characteristics
(α=β=1),
(5.23)
(5.24)
If ℜ is the equivalent reluctance per unit length at the surface of the tank in the y
direction, then
(5.25)
From equations 5.24 and 5.25 we get
(5.26)
The above equation gives the value of complex reluctance per unit length in the y
and x directions (per unit surface area) along the surface of tank (with the tank
thickness along the z direction) for linear material characteristics. It is assumed
that the tank thickness is more than 3 times the skin depth. For non-linear
characteristics of magnetic steel, semi-empirical correction factors are used [32]
(5.27)
The proper values of these elements (real and complex reluctances),
corresponding to the transformer parameters and frequency of the supplied
voltage, are placed into a network scheme along with the voltage sources which
model magnetomotive forces in the windings. All the network elements are
expressed in per unit (relative) values referred to the data of the inter-winding gap.
The power losses are calculated from the surface field strength as per equation 5.3,
with a semi-empirical linearization coefficient of 1.4 for the solid steel. The threedimensional Reluctance Network Method for tank loss estimation has been
verified [40,41] on various ratings of power transformers from 31.5 MVA upto
315 MVA. The method is based on the assumption of four-quarter symmetric
structure of a three-phase transformer. Later on the method has been further
improved [42] to take into account various deformations of the symmetric model.
Due to the increased number of non-standard reluctance elements, they are first
expressed with the help of analytical formulae and then introduced into the matrix
equation of the entire 3-D model.
As compared to analytical and semi-analytical methods, numerical methods
can give more accurate results but higher computational efforts are required.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

195

Numerical methods can be combined with analytical formulations to reduce the
computational efforts. A 3-D FEM analysis of eddy current problems presented in
[43] uses complex magnetic vector potential. Eddy current losses in steel
materials are computed by combining the numerical method with the analytical
formulation because of the discretization problem due to very thin skin depth of
the magnetic steels. A power transformer has dimensions of few meters, whereas
skin depths are in millimeters resulting into errors due to a poor aspect ratio of
elements. A method of modeling tank wall and other fittings with surface elements
is outlined in [44], which obviates the need of complex layers of thin elements to
account for the skin effect. The basis of formulation has been explained in Section
4.2. The surface impedance element modeling approach helps designers to
calculate the tank loss efficiently and accurately.
The presence of the tank has some influence on the stray loss in other structural
components (frame, flitch plate, etc.), which depends on the relative closeness of
the tank from windings as compared to the core. If C and T are the distances of the
core and tank from the inter-winding gap-center as shown in figure 5.16, the
fringing of the leakage flux at winding ends towards the core is independent of the
presence or absence of the tank with magnetic shunts if [45]
(5.28)
In this case, the stray loss in the tank can be isolated by doing the load loss test
with and without it. If the tank is lined with aluminum or copper (eddy current)
shields, its effect on stray losses in other structural components is more
pronounced. A much higher distance between the tank and outside winding is
required [45] to make the tank’s influence negligible, which is governed by the
relation T≤h.

Figure 5.16 Effect of tank on other stray losses

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

196

Chapter 5

Another important aspect related to the electromagnetic field calculations of a
tank wall is the analysis of temperature rise of the bolted joint between the tank
and cover. The currents induced in the tank and cover due to leakage and high
current fields, are forced to complete their path through flange bolts. The bolts are
overheated if the induced currents flowing in the tank and cover are large. The
flow of these induced currents through the bolts can be avoided by completely
isolating them from the tank and cover. This results in a number of problems. First,
the induced currents may concentrate in the larger cross-sectional area of flanges
causing local overheating, which leads to deterioration of gaskets over a period of
time. Second, due to the bad electromagnetic contact between the tank and cover,
there is an increase in magnetic voltage drop (magnetomotive force), leading to a
greater magnetic field strength on the bolt surface, which may give rise to
excessive local eddy current losses in the magnetic steel bolts. Also, the condition
that the tank and cover should be at the same electrical (ground) potential is not
satisfied. This phenomenon of overheating hazard in the case of bad
electromagnetic contact has been investigated in [46] by representing the bolted
joint by an equivalent reluctance. The local eddy currents in these bolts may cause
dangerous hot spots, damaging the gaskets/sealing between the flanges. Hence,
the better option would be to connect the two parts by metallic strips (links) made
of high conductivity materials like aluminum or copper to maintain both the parts
at the same electrical potential and to provide a low resistance alternative path to
the induced currents in the tank and cover. The electrical connection through the
metallic bolts cannot be relied upon (either due to presence of paint or bad contact
resistance). The number of connecting links depends on the amount of leakage
field/high current field. For small transformers with a low field at the tank surface,
two connecting links may be enough.
Currents flowing in these connecting links can be hundreds of amperes in large
power transformers (say, 300 MVA rating). These currents are high particularly in
a bell type of tank construction (described in Chapter 10), in which curb (flanged)
joint is at the position of the bottom yoke. A typical leakage field plot is shown in
figure 5.17. The construction is not suitable for providing an effective shielding
arrangement. This is because if a vertical magnetic shunt is placed with its bottom
end at point B, its length will be lower than the ideal one. An additional small
vertical shunt placed between points C and D will result into a higher temperature
on the tank surface at the locations near these points (since the flux will leave the
shunt and enter the tank at these locations). Hence, it is always preferable to have
a magnetic shunt in one piece between the point at which the flux enters the tank
to the point where it leaves the tank. Therefore, it is advisable to have the curb joint
as low as possible (in the bell construction) or as high as possible (in the
conventional construction with the curb joint at top). If it is not possible, a
complex arrangement of shunts as shown in figure 5.18 may have to be tried. The
shunt S2, which can be fixed to shunt S1, overlaps on the shunts S1 and S3
shielding the curb joint.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

197

Figure 5.17 Leakage field plot for bell tank

When high current leads pass nearby the curb joint of the tank, excessive
heating of bolts may occur resulting in deterioration of gaskets. In such cases,
either adequate number and size of external links connecting the tank and cover
should be used (for shunting the currents) or the magnitudes of currents should be
controlled by careful positioning of the leads. The arrangement of figure 5.18 is
not useful in the case of field due to high current leads.

5.7 Stray Loss in Bushing Mounting Plates
As the transformer rating increases, the current in its low voltage side as well as
the high voltage side increases. This leads to increase in the eddy currents in the
structures that surround the bushings (e.g., bushing mounting plate).

Figure 5.18 Shielding of curb joint

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

198

Chapter 5

The bushing mounting plates are made of mild steel (MS) or stainless steel (SS)
material. As the rating increases, the eddy current loss and the related heating
effects increase. The loss and temperature rise of the MS plate (being a magnetic
material) are more, and hence for higher ratings SS plates are used. But compared
to the MS material, the SS material is expensive; hence instead of using a SS plate,
an MS plate with SS inserts is used up to a certain current.
An experimental analysis of eddy current phenomenon in the structure that
surrounds the high current bushings of a large capacity transformer is presented in
[47]. A basic model with a conducting current of 20 kA is constructed to
investigate the eddy current phenomenon. An eddy current probe is used for the
direct measurement of the magnitude and phase of eddy currents. Twodimensional formulation is used to estimate the eddy current patterns. The
formulation is based on few approximations, and the experimentally measured
data is used for the calculations. The eddy current losses in high current (10 to 20
kA) terminations are analyzed in [48]. Experimental investigations have been
carried out on actual physical models with different geometric dimensions and
types of shielding. An analytical method is presented in [32,49] to determine and
prevent hot spots in bushing mounting plates. The instantaneous field intensity at
any point on the plate surface is calculated as a vector sum of field intensities due
to currents in the conductors of three-phases. Equation 5.3 is used to calculate the
loss if the plate thickness is sufficiently larger than the skin depth (the calculated
loss value is multiplied by 2 since the plate is excited on its both surfaces). If the
thickness is smaller than the skin depth, a correction factor based on figure 5.3 can
be used corresponding to Case 2 (excitation of the plate by the same value of field
on both surfaces).
A formula for calculating the permissible r.m.s. value of bushing current is
given in [49], over which there is a possibility of excessive overheating,

(5.29)

where d is the center-to-center distance between phases as shown in figure 5.19
and t is plate thickness; both the dimensions are in meters. This formula has been
derived for a typical grade of (magnetic) structural steel having conductivity of
about 7×106 mho/m at 20°C. For a plate of thickness 6 mm with a distance of 150
mm between the phases, the maximum permitted current is about 780 amperes. As
the current rating increases, non-magnetic inserts made of high resistivity
SS material are used as shown in figure 5.20. Depending upon the width of
inserts, which can be in the range of 20 mm to 50 mm, the current rating can be
increased substantially. For still higher currents, a mounting plate of SS material is
used.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

199

Figure 5.19 Bushing mounting plate

Different shapes of non-magnetic inserts have been analyzed using 3-D FEM
formulation in [50] to reduce the tank wall loss in small pad-mounted
transformers. In these transformers LV leads are usually terminated on the tank
wall. The results of the FEM simulation have been verified on a transformer in
which T shaped SS inserts were used.
In [35], the results of the analytical formulation given in [32,49] are compared
with that of 3-D FEM analysis and experimental measurements. The loss
occurring in a bushing mounting plate is calculated indirectly from the measured
values of initial temperature rise and steady-state temperature rise. These
methods, in which indirect verification of loss is done, are described in Section
5.10. These methods are useful because it is very difficult to verify the calculation
by conventional experimental measurements. This is due to the fact that the loss
occurring in the plate cannot be exactly isolated from the tested load loss value of
the transformer. If the conditions are simulated by using a low-voltage highcurrent source in a laboratory, the loss measurement is very difficult (if not
impossible) at a low voltage (of few volts).

5.8 Evaluation of Stray Loss Due to High Current Leads
In furnace transformers and large generator transformers, the stray loss due to
induced eddy currents in structural components in the vicinity of high current
leads can become substantial. It could lead to hot spots if adequate magnetic
clearances are not provided or shielding measures are not taken.

Figure 5.20 Bushing mounting plate with non-magnetic inserts

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

200

Chapter 5

Evaluation of stray loss due to a high current field has improved gradually from
2-D analytical methods to the present day 3-D numerical methods. The method
discussed in [51] evaluates eddy losses in a semi-infinite solid nearby a filament
current. Practical cases, however, involve plates of finite thickness, and hence a
modification of the solution is required. An empirical formula is presented in [7]
for eddy loss calculation in steel plates based on measurements on an
experimental set-up. The field pattern and eddy current losses due to current
carrying strip bus bars are evaluated in [5] for an aluminum sheet. The current
distribution is expressed in terms of an infinite number of sinusoidal distributions
with the help of Fourier integral, and then the field due to any current distribution
is obtained by superimposition of fields due to sinusoidal components. In [52]
also, the solution method first transforms the original current distribution into
sinusoidal current sheets. The method is therefore quite general and can be used
for different current distributions (single-phase current and three-phase current)
and different shapes of conductors (filament, rectangular conductor, etc.). A
laboratory experiment has been conducted to verify the theoretical results. A
method for analyzing the electromagnetic field in a system that comprises of
parallel current carrying bars placed above a steel wall is presented in [53]. The
current density within the cross section of bars is computed using the integral
equation technique.
All these methods, due to some assumptions and approximations, are useful for
simplified 2-D geometries and cannot be applied to complex 3-D structures. With
the quantum improvement in 3-D FEM software capabilities, 3-D problems can
be easily simulated and analyzed. The analysis of eddy current patterns in the LV
lead termination of a furnace transformer is done in [52] by using 3-D FEM
analysis. The total eddy loss estimated by using time-harmonic 3-D FEM
formulation is found to be in close agreement with that observed during the testing
of the transformer. The arrow plot of eddy currents in the front plate of the
termination is shown in figure 5.21 (reproduced from [52] with permission from
IEE). The three rectangular holes in the plate carry three-phase currents of 56 kA
magnitude. The plot shows the eddy currents at the instant when R-phase current
is maximum. There is concentration of eddy currents at locations A, B, C, D, E and
F. Hence, hot spots developed at these locations during the testing of the furnace
transformer. Therefore, for transformers having very high currents on the LV side,
magnetic clearances and material of termination structures have to be judiciously
selected. In most of the cases, it requires 3-D analysis in the absence of data of
previous proven designs.
It should be noted that time-harmonic 2-D and 3-D formulations find the timeharmonic magnetic field in and around current-carrying conductors, in the
presence of isotropic materials that may be conducting, magnetic, or both.
Theoretically, the time-harmonic analysis is not possible for non-linear materials
because sinusoidally-varying sources do not give rise to sinusoidally-varying
fields. The basis of the time-harmonic analysis is as follows [54].

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

201

Figure 5.21 Eddy currents in the front plate of the furnace transformer [52]

In the time-harmonic formulations, the sources and fields are assumed to be
time-harmonic at one specified frequency; complex phasors are used to represent
them. For the eddy current analysis involving non-linear materials, a transient
formulation may have to be used. In the time harmonic formulation based on the
magnetic vector potential A, the solution of the following complex diffusion
equation is found.
(5.30)
In 2-D problems, A is assumed in the z direction only, and is a complex quantity.
The term
represents the source current density vector J0 and is refereed
to as DC distribution of current density (applicable to the three-phase conductors
of figure 5.21 when eddy currents in them are not considered). The other term
represents the induced current density (applicable to the conducting
structural components in which eddy currents are induced). Equating real parts
and imaginary parts on both sides of the above equation we get
(5.31)

(5.32)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

202

Chapter 5

Figure 5.22 High current carrying bar parallel to structural plate

The solution of equation 5.31, Re[A], corresponds to the instant when Re[J0] is at
peak with Im[J0] as zero. Whereas, the solution of equation 5.32, Im[A],
corresponds to the instant when Re[J0] is zero with Im[J0] at peak value.
Obviously at any other time instant the solution is
A(t)=Re[A] cosωt+Im[A] sinωt

(5.33)

Thus, the time-harmonic (frequency-domain) analysis technique is
computationally quite efficient since the data required to be stored is just twice
that of the static solution. For a time-domain analysis of eddy current problems
involving non-linear material and/or non-sinusoidal excitations, the solution has
to be computed at each sufficiently small time-step requiring a large
computational effort and time.
After having seen some of the methods reported for analyzing stray loss due to
a field of high currents, let us see some practical aspects of design. When a high
current bar runs parallel to a structural plate (e.g., tank), there are two possible
configurations as shown in figure 5.22. The configuration in which the edge
(thickness) of the bar faces the plate (Case b: edge-wise) is better than the other
one in which the width of the bar (w) faces the plate (Case a: width-wise). General
guidelines and rules given below for designing magnetic clearances are based on
the results of a number of time-harmonic 2-D FEM simulations (with mild steel
plate having σ =7×106mho/m and µr=100). The simulations are done with the bar
current of 4 kA (r.m.s. value).
1) The edge-wise configuration gives a loss advantage of about 15 to 20% over the
width-wise configuration. About the same amount of advantage is reported in
references [22,4]. For a given clearance d between the bar and plate, the edge-wise
configuration always results into a lower loss. Sometimes the space restrictions may
not allow the edge-wise placement. The loss values obtained by 2-D FEM simulations
are somewhat higher than that reported in [4] (based on experimental measurements
done on 1m×2m plate). The difference could be because of the fact that the actual
loss is different due to the finite length of plate in the z direction and the associated
end effects (2-D FEM calculates loss per unit length in the z direction assuming
that the plate has infinite length in the z direction). Moreover, a constant value of
permeability is assumed in 2-D FEM analysis, which is not the case in reality.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

203

Table 5.3 Loss in plate for a distance of 120 mm from the center of bar

2) It is generally observed that the loss in the plate (per meter length in the z
direction) for the edge-wise and width-wise configurations are approximately
equal for a given distance between the center-line of the bar and the plate surface
(refer to table 5.3). The plate thickness and width are 10 mm and 1000 mm
respectively, whereas the bar thickness is 20 mm.
3) Theoretically, the plate loss varies in the square proportion of the bar current for
linear material characteristics. An exponent of current slightly less than 2 is
reported in [7] as explained in Section 5.1.2.
4) It can be seen from figure 5.23 that the loss varies as the frequency is varied
with an exponent in the range of 0.7 to 0.8. The effect of frequency has to be
considered in the case of excitation currents with a high harmonic content. An
exponent of 0.8 is specified for frequency in IEC 61378—Part 1, as explained in
Section 5.1.2.

Figure 5.23 Effect of frequency variation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

204

Chapter 5

Figure 5.24 Effect of change in bar width on plate loss

5) In width-wise case, when width of the bar is changed keeping the current
flowing through it and its distance (d in figure 5.22) from the plate constant, there
is no noticeable change in the plate loss as shown in figure 5.24 (although the loss
in the bar changes). The plate loss is basically affected by the magnitude of current
and the clearance. But with the increase in bar width (for the same current), the
loss density and temperature rise in the plate reduce. Hence, for a given current
with more width, the plate loss remains almost constant and one can have lower
clearance for the same temperature rise. The loss in the edge-wise case is lower
than that in the width-wise case as explained in point 1.
6) Losses occurring in the plate are substantially influenced by the variation of its
material conductivity as shown in figure 5.25 for a non-magnetic material. For a
very low conductivity value (e.g., stainless steel material), the plate thickness is
less than the skin depth. It becomes a case of resistance-limited behavior, and the
loss increases with the increase in conductivity (this is in agreement with the
discussion in Section 4.5.1 and equation 4.93).
As the conductivity increases (e.g., aluminum material), the induced eddy
currents in the plate become substantial reducing the incident field and losses in
the plate. It gradually displays the inductance-limited behavior as the skin depth
becomes quite thin as compared to the plate thickness.
The behavior is similar to that explained for aluminum material in Section
5.1.1 with reference to figure 5.5.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

205

Figure 5.25 Effect of change in conductivity of plate

7) For two bars carrying currents in opposite directions (go and return), there are
three possible configurations as shown in figure 5.26. The calculated loss in Case
(c) is the least and that in Case (a) is the highest. In all the three cases, the loss
increases with the increase in the distance of separation (s) between the two bars.
Hence, the distance of separation should be minimum as permitted by mechanical,
thermal and electrical considerations.
For all the configurations of the bar and plate discussed in this section, the
manufacturers usually conduct a number of experiments on various
configurations and measure rise in temperatures. Based on these measurements,
the clearances are standardized for various currents and configurations to limit the
plate temperature rise to a specific permitted value.

Figure 5.26 Different configurations of bars carrying go and return currents

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

206

Chapter 5

Figure 5.27 High current bar in a metallic enclosure

When a high current bar passes through a metallic enclosure/bus-duct (see figure
5.27), the eddy loss in the enclosure is a function of its perimeter or its distance
from the bar. The higher the perimeter or distance, the higher is the current that
can be allowed to pass through the enclosure. The loss can be controlled by
making the enclosure of a non-magnetic material having high resistivity or by use
of eddy current shields (aluminum/copper shields). If three-phase bars are passing
through it, the eddy loss can be reduced substantially if the bars are placed
symmetrically inside the enclosure and close to each other (to make the resultant
field small).
When magnetic steel is shielded by aluminum or copper shield, eddy currents
induced in the shield are forced out to its edges and may cause local overheating at
the edges or in structural magnetic parts close to the edges. Hence, the shield
should of sufficient width and should be made in one piece (without
discontinuity).

5.9 Measures for Stray Loss Control
The stray loss in a structural component is reduced by a number of ways:
- use of laminated material
- use of high resistivity material
- reduction of flux density in the component by use of material with lower
permeability
- reduction of flux density in the component by provision of a parallel magnetic
path having low reluctance and loss
- reduction of flux density in the component by diverting/repelling the incident
flux by use of a shielding plate having high conductivity
These are general guidelines, and the application of these measures depends on
the configuration and type of excitation as discussed in Section 5.1. The measures
for stray loss control of structural components, except tank, have been discussed
in previous sections. In this section, methods for reducing stray losses in tank are
elaborated.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

207

Three methods are commonly used for reducing stray losses in tanks. The first
method uses yoke shunts which collect the leakage field coming out of the
windings so that there is very little flux external to the core and windings.
Secondly, magnetic shunts can be provided on the tank so that they carry most of
the leakage flux. Thirdly, the tank may be lined with aluminum or copper plates
(shields); the eddy currents in these plates tend to shield the tank from most of the
radial incident flux.
Shielding measures are not usually adopted for small distribution transformers
and the cost-benefit analysis is done to take the decision regarding the use of these
measures [55]. The measures for stray loss control are discussed with reference to
large power transformers in [56,57,58]. The methods for reducing the loss in
various structural components due to high current and leakage fields are described
briefly in [56]. An approximate formula is given for the calculation of incident
radial flux density on the tank wall in [57] and the effectiveness of magnetic
shunts is also investigated. The permissible values of the tangential component of
the magnetic field strength on various constructional elements are given in [59] to
eliminate local overheating hazards. The principles of design (type and thickness)
of tank shields are also explained.
Guidelines and useful curves are given in [60] to prevent overheating hazards
in windings, first step of core, flitch plates, frames and tank. The experimental
results of a 37 MVA transformer are presented in [61] for various proportions of
tank shielding by magnetic shunts. The effect of positioning of inter-phase
connections of high current carrying leads on the tank loss has been explained.
The effects of tank and its shields on the magnetic field and stray loss in windings
are evaluated and compared with the corresponding measurements carried out on
a 150 MVA experimental transformer in [62]. A number of findings are reported,
viz. flux density distribution varies along the circumference of the winding when
placed in tank with shields, flux density distribution in a winding may be
calculated with a single-phase representation regardless of the tank and tank
shield conditions, winding eddy loss in the absence of tank is almost the same as
that with tank without any shield, winding eddy loss increases when placed in a
tank with magnetic shields (shunts) and reduces when placed in a tank with
aluminum shields, and circulating current loss does not depend much on the tank
and shielding conditions.
Some geometrical factors have a significant influence on the tested stray losses.
A small difference in heights of LV and HV windings can affect various stray loss
components in different ways. For example, if LV winding is taller by 1% and is
placed symmetrically with respect to HV winding height, the losses in the core
clamping structures reduce, whereas the losses in the tank increase. This is
because the leakage field at winding ends is now more oriented towards the tank.
Some manufacturers may purposely adopt this design to reduce the axial short
circuit forces in LV winding (which is generally weaker if it is a layer winding).
On the contrary, if HV winding is taller, the stray losses in the core, frames and
flitch plates increase, and those in the tank reduce. This shows that a

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

208

Chapter 5

manufacturing variation in geometrical dimensions may have significant effect
on the leakage field pattern and stray losses, and this is one of the reasons why the
tested load loss values of transformers, manufactured with an identical design,
sometimes differ noticeably.
5.9.1 Magnetic shielding
The magnetic shunts are more effective in controlling stray losses as compared to
the non-magnetic (eddy current) shields. They offer a low reluctance path to the
leakage flux constraining its path in a predetermined fashion. In the case of eddy
current shields, the flux repelled by them may find a path through nearby
structural components negating the advantages of shielding. An ideal magnetic
shunt (infinite permeability) has no magnetic voltage drop across its length. The
magnetic shunts are basically useful to shield structural components from the
leakage field. They are not used for shielding against the field of high currents. If
magnetic shunts are of adequate thickness and are made of CRGO laminations
with lower watts/kg characteristics, the losses in them are almost negligible.
Usually, left over pieces of core laminations (from original rolls) are used to make
a magnetic shunt. The height of magnetic shunts should be higher than the height
of windings. The optimum height can be decided based on the leakage field
pattern obtained from the FEM analysis. The shunts can be placed on the tank
from the level of top yoke-center to the level of bottom yoke-center in the absence
of any detailed analysis. For a 360 MVA, 500 kV transformer, it is suggested in
[26] that the height of shunts should be more than that of windings by one meter
(500 mm at each end).
There are basically two types of magnetic shunts, viz. width-wise and edgewise shunts. The width-wise shunts (more commonly used) are placed on the tank
as shown in figure 5.28. The width of shunts should be as small as possible to
reduce entry losses at their top and bottom portions where the leakage field
impinges on them radially. As the shunt width reduces, the number of shunts
increases leading to a higher manufacturing time. Hence, each manufacturer
arrives at an optimum width of shunts. It can be as high as 300 mm and as small as
50 mm. The gaps between shunts have to be kept as minimum as mechanically
possible (some space is required for their fixing arrangement on the tank) for
effective shielding. By taking advantage of the fact that the incident radial flux
enters the shunt (mostly in its end portions) at different points and that the (axial)
flux density in the shunt (corresponding to the collected flux) is maximum at the
center, a magnetic shunt of varying length can also be used as shown in figure
5.29. Most of the incident flux can enter the shunts through their thin edges
reducing the entry loss. The saving of shunt material (laminations) obtained has to
be compared with the extra manufacturing time required. An optimum design of a
similar tank shield arrangement is reported in [63] by using the orthogonal array
design of experiments technique in conjunction with 3-D FEM.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

Figure 5.28 Width-wise shunt

209

Figure 5.29 Optimum width-wise shunt

A practical formula for calculation of thickness of width-wise tank shunt is
given in [6,32] with reference to figure 5.16:

(5.34)

where B, the flux density value to be limited in shunts, can be taken as 1.7 Tesla for
CRGO material and 1.4 Tesla for CRNGO material. Since the effective
permeability of the width-wise shunt is less due to inter-laminar non-magnetic
gaps, it is preferable to take values of B about 20% lower than the above values
(i.e., 1.4 Tesla for CRGO and 1.15 Tesla for CRNGO). Under overloading
conditions, shunts may get saturated and become ineffective; hence a design with
a lower value of flux density also helps under overloading conditions.
The other type of magnetic shunt, edge-wise shunt, is better than width-wise
shunt because the flux is incident on the thickness (edge) of laminations resulting
in negligible eddy loss in them. A typical edge-wise shunt is shown in figure 5.30.
The effective permeability of laminations as seen by the incident flux is much

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

210

Chapter 5

higher for this shunt as compared to the width-wise shunt since the flux does not
encounter any non-magnetic gaps once it enters the shunt. In the width-wise
shunt, due to non-magnetic gaps (however small they be), the effective
permeability at the entry point reduces making it less effective as compared to the
edge-wise shunt. The flux distribution at the entry point is quite complicated. The
presence of inter-laminar non-magnetic gap reduces the average permeability in
the direction normal to the laminations to a low value, hence the flux tends to stay
within a particular lamination until it saturates. The flux finds its way through the
next lamination when the earlier lamination saturates and so on. Thus, it can be
seen that the effectiveness of the width-wise shunt is less as compared to the edgewise shunt.
The manufacturing process of edge-wise shunts is quite elaborate. In one of the
forms, a set of laminations are epoxy moulded (like that of laminated flitch
plates). In another design, it can be made into a wound form. The loss advantage
with the edge-wise shunts has to be assessed vis-à-vis their higher cost and
manufacturing time as compared to the width-wise shunts. The performances of
these two types of shunts are compared in [64] by finding their effective
anisotropic permeability. A substantial reduction in tank stray losses is reported in
[26] by the use of edge-wise shunts. It is preferable to experimentally check the
quantum of stray loss reduction before standardizing the use of edge-wise shunts.

Figure 5.30 Edge-wise shunt

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

211

Figure 5.31 Anisotropic permeability

For a stack of laminations subjected to a magnetic field, the directional effects of
material anisotropy and lamination stacking factor have to be taken into account.
Because of the obvious difficulties of treating an individual lamination separately
in any kind of formulation, a stack of laminations can be represented by a solid
anisotropic block. For a stack of laminations (figure 5.31) with a stacking (space)
factor of k, subjected to a field in the y direction, the effective relative permeability
of the equivalent solid anisotropic block across the laminations is [44,65]

(5.35)
and tangential to the laminations is
(5.36)
where µx and µy are the relative permeabilities of the lamination material in the x
and y directions respectively (µx, µy >>1). The reduced effective permeability
across the laminations (µn) gives the correct representation of much deeper
penetration of the flux in the stack of laminations. This tends to make the flux
density distribution more uniform as compared to the inaccurate isotropic
modeling, where the flux concentrates only in the surface layers giving a highly
non-uniform flux density distribution. A 3-D FEM formulation, which takes
electric and magnetic anisotropies into account, is reported in [66]. The electric
conductivity and magnetic permeability are represented by tensor quantities in the
Cartesian system of coordinates.
Yoke shunts are another form of magnetic shunts (flux collectors), which are
placed parallel to the yoke at the top and bottom ends of the windings. These
shunts can be quite effective since the fluxes coming out from the three phases can
add up to zero in them. The yoke shunts provide an excellent means of guiding the
leakage field safely back to the core minimizing stray losses in the tank and other
structural components. They tend to make the leakage field in the windings axial,
minimizing the winding eddy loss due to the radial field at the winding ends. The
analysis and design of yoke shunts in large power transformers must deal with a
full three-dimensional solution of the leakage field because of the complicated
geometries and anisotropic materials used. The effects of a yoke shunt are studied

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

212

Chapter 5

in [67] assuming that the shunt is connected directly to the yoke. The work is
extended in [68] to include the effects of a small gap between the shunt and yoke
on the leakage field distribution. All the surfaces of magnetic circuit components
are considered as magnetic equipotentials (infinitely permeable and nonsaturated). The equipotentials for all the surfaces except that of shunt are zero. The
shunt floats at a potential, which is a function of the gap between the shunt and
yoke. The leakage flux transferred to the yoke decreases as the shunt is spaced
away from it. Hence, the gap between the shunt and yoke must be kept sufficiently
small for the effective control of the leakage field. In further work [69], the field in
the gap and yoke is analyzed in detail. The laminated iron (yoke) is treated as a
solid anisotropic block with effective permeabilities in three directions calculated
as per the method illustrated in [65]. The references [67,68,69] give useful
practical guidelines for the yoke shunt design. In [70], the Reluctance Network
Method is used to study the effectiveness of yoke shunts in controlling stray
losses. The effect of gap length between the windings and yoke shunt on the stray
losses in the tank and other structural components is reported. Yoke shunts can be
conveniently used for three-phase five-limb and single-phase three-limb
constructions, where the transfer of flux can be easily achieved through the yoke
steps on the either side of windings. For the three-phase three-limb construction.
the collection of flux by the yoke from the outer phases is not straight-forward and
a special transfer arrangement may be needed. Hence, yoke shunts are usually not
used alone in the three-phase three-limb construction. They are aided by either
eddy current shields or magnetic shunts on the tank.
The merits and demerits of magnetic shunts are explained in [71]. The main
disadvantage of magnetic shunts is that they cannot be used on the tank surfaces of
irregular shapes. The losses measured under various combinations of shielding
(yoke shunts, magnetic shunts and eddy current shields) arrangements are
reported in the paper. Some manufacturers use wound steel pressure ring on the
top of the windings, which not only acts as a clamping ring (for mechanical
stability during short circuits) but it also reduces the stray losses in structural
components. The steel ring provides a low reluctance path for the leakage field
coming out of the windings and diverts it into the yoke away from the structural
components. Thus, the axial component of the leakage field increases and the
radial component reduces affecting the winding eddy loss. The increase or
decrease in the winding eddy loss is decided by the conductor dimensions and
winding configurations.
A combination of horizontal and vertical magnetic shunts can also be used on
the tank as shown in figure 5.32. The vertical shunts are placed in front of three
phases, while the horizontal shunts are placed at the level of yokes. A significant
part of the incident leakage field from three phases gets effectively cancelled in
the horizontal shunts if it is properly collected by them. The effectiveness of this
arrangement can be enhanced by putting eddy current shields on the short sides of
the tank. The leakage flux repelled from eddy current shields is collected by
horizontal shunts aiding the cancellation effect.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

213

Figure 5.32 Combination of vertical and horizontal magnetic shunts

Usually, the tank shapes are not so conducive for the placement of magnetic
shunts and eddy current shields in such an ideal manner.
5.9.2 Eddy current shielding
Aluminum or copper shields are used for shielding structural components from
the high current and leakage fields. Eddy currents induced in them repel the
incident field reducing the losses in structural components. As discussed in
Section 5.1, the thickness of these shields should be adequate for their
effectiveness and for reducing the loss in shields themselves. In most of the cases,
the loss in the structural component and eddy current shield is more than that of
the structural component and magnetic shunt. However, the eddy current shields
have the advantage that they can be fitted on odd shapes of the tank unlike
magnetic shunts. The weight of the eddy current shield is also usually lower than
the magnetic shunt. For shielding a tank from the high current field, the eddy
current shields are better than the magnetic shunts. This is because there are gaps
between magnetic shunts reducing their effectiveness as shields.
An analytical formulation is given in [72] for calculating loss in the eddy
current shield and the tank shielded by it. The paper has used a two-dimensional
approximation and has first outlined the method of calculation for eddy loss of a
tank, shielded by an aluminum shield, due to a line current. The method is then
extended to transformer windings, wherein the windings are replaced by an
infinite array of line currents by using the theory of images. The eddy current loss
in the shields used in air core reactors is evaluated by the image method using
Fourier-Bessel integral in [73]. For the finite dimensions of shields, 2-D
approximations and end effects make the analytical formulations inaccurate and
such problems can be simulated by 3-D numerical techniques.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

214

Chapter 5

The stray loss control by this flux rejection technique is suitable for structural
components of odd shapes. The components required to make the eddy current
shielding arrangement are of simpler construction and the shields can be suitably
formed to protect the areas having complex shapes. The disadvantage of this
method is that there are losses produced in the shield itself and these must be
accurately evaluated. The shield dimensions have to be properly designed and
adequate cooling needs to be provided to limit its temperature rise. Secondly, the
diverted flux from the shield may cause overheating in the nearby unprotected
structural parts. Hence, the design and positioning of the eddy current shields have
to be done more carefully as compared to the magnetic shunts. The shield should
of sufficient width as explained earlier in Section 5.8.
A combination of eddy current shields (on the tank) and yoke shunts can be
used. This arrangement makes the leakage field predominantly axial (which gets
collected by the yoke shunts) minimizing stray losses in the tank and other
structural components.

5.10 Methods for Experimental Verification
Conventional search coil/Hall effect probe measurements have been used by many
researchers for verifying the calculated values of flux densities or current densities
in the structural components. There are some other indirect methods of predicting
the eddy loss in the structural components based on their temperature rise. One
method uses the measured steady-state temperature rise, while the other uses the
initial temperature rise. These methods are described below.
5.10.1 Steady-state temperature rise
The structural component (e.g., bushing mounting plate), wherein eddy current
losses need to be calculated, is allowed to reach a steady-state temperature rise.
The component is assumed as a vertical plate in the method described below. The
oil film temperature, which is the average of measured values of the plate and oil
temperatures, is then calculated. If the test is performed in a laboratory in the air
medium, then the air film temperature is found out as the average of measured
values of the plate and ambient air temperature. The properties of oil/ air film (ρ, k,
υ, Pr, and β) are then obtained [4] where

ρ=Density in kg m-3
k=Thermal conductivity in W m-1 °C-1
υ=Kinematic viscosity in m2 s-1
Pr=Prandtl number
β=Coefficient of thermal cubic expansion in °C-1
The Rayleigh number is given by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

215
(5.37)

where
g=Acceleration due to gravity in ms-2
l=Vertical length of plate in m
Δθ=Temperature difference between plate and oil/air in °C
The Nusselt number is then calculated [74,75] from one of the following two
equations:
(5.38)

(5.39)
The heat transfer coefficient (h) is calculated as
(5.40)
Finally, the loss in the plate is given by
P=h×A×Δθ

(5.41)

where A is area of the convection surface in m2. The estimation of losses in
bushing mounting plate from the measured steady-state temperature rise and its
comparison with that calculated by the analytical method and 3-D FEM analysis
are reported in [35].
5.10.2 Initial temperature rise
The eddy loss in the plate can also be calculated from the initial temperature rise
measured in the first few seconds of the application of current. The power
developed in a unit volume inside a solid can be expressed in terms of temperature
θ as [6]
(5.42)
The terms kx, ky and kz are the thermal conductivities in x, y and z directions
respectively, and c is specific heat (J kg-1 0C-1). If the plate temperature is measured
sufficiently rapidly after switching on the current (at t=0) so that the temperature

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

216

Chapter 5

of the body may be considered uniform, the term inside the bracket in the equation
reduces to zero giving

(5.43)
The term (∂θ/∂t)t=0 represents the gradient of the initial part of the heating curve.
Thus, one can find power losses occurring in a structural component by a fast (say
in the first 30 seconds) and accurate temperature rise measurement by using
thermocouples. The loss in a bushing mounting plate has been calculated from the
initial temperature rise measurements in [35], which agrees well with that
calculated from the steady-state temperature rise and 3-D FEM analysis. The loss
in frames is estimated from the initial temperature rise measurements in [31].
The method works well for thin structural plates (5 to 6 mm thickness). When
the thickness increases, an appreciable error may be introduced due to faster heat
transfer from the hot surface layer (where almost the entire loss is taking place) to
the inner colder layers. The improved thermometric method proposed in [76]
takes into account the heat removal from the surface to the surroundings and to the
interior of the structural plate by a correction factor (which is a function of plate
thickness). The method sets up equations of heat flow and electromagnetic wave
propagation in the material, which take into account the non-uniform distribution
of heat sources, the variation of permeability with the field strength and the
excitation modes of eddy currents. These equations are then solved numerically
using a computer. An example of the analysis of the tank wall loss of a transformer
is given in which the direct measurement of the surface field strength is compared
with that derived from the thermometric method.

5.11 Estimation of Stray Losses in Overexcitation Condition
The overvoltages appearing across the transformer terminals are classified
according to their duration. The specifications regarding overvoltages are usually
provided by users as: 110 or 115% continuous, 125% for 1 minute, 140% for 5
seconds, and 150% for 1 second. Temporary overvoltages can occur due to the
disconnection of a load at the remote end of a long transmission line,
ferroresonance, etc. The ferroresonant overvoltages initiated by the energization
processes last through several cycles or even few seconds depending on the decay
rate of the transformer inrush current. Apart from all these, there can be a voltage
variation due to load fluctuations. An overexcitation leading to the overfluxing
condition in a transformer causes additional losses due to the core saturation. The
resulting spill-over flux from the core can cause intense local losses in conducting
parts leading to hot spots. This stray flux cuts the winding conductors and other
metallic structural parts and causes eddy currents to flow in them. Unlaminated
structural parts can be overheated rapidly by such eddy currents, and the condition

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

217

of adjacent insulation may deteriorate. To avoid these eddy current losses and hot
spots, the structural parts have to be properly designed. The effects of
overexcitation are elaborated in [77]. Typical loss curves in windings and
structural parts as a function of overexcitation are given. The harmonic analysis of
excitation current at various overexcitation levels is also given.
Finding a suitable analytical model for the purpose of studying overfluxing
phenomenon is a difficult task. Good working models exist for transformers in
steady-state. There are several methods, which try to find a suitable model for
transient-state analysis. The models presented in [78,79] analyze the
ferroresonance phenomena in distribution transformers connected via a long
cable. A model based on EMTP (Electro-Magnetic Transient Program) is reported
in [80] for simulating a transformer under the condition of out-of-phase
synchronization. A model for a three-phase, two-winding and five-limb
transformer with its supply cables is presented in [81]. In [82], an approach for
studying the behavior of a transformer under overfluxing conditions is presented,
which is developed by suitable modifications to the model presented in [81]. The
lumped parameter approach is used for representing limb and yoke reluctances.
The part of flux fringing out of core, and not linked to the windings, is lumped into
one parameter called air-flux. This air-flux path is located between the upper and
lower yokes. To take into account the saturation effect of the limbs, modification
in the basic model has been done by incorporating one additional path parallel to
each limb. The analysis showed that the yoke reinforcement can help in
controlling the path of the stray flux under overfluxing conditions.
The exact simulation of overexcitation of a transformer under the saturated
core condition poses a real challenge to researchers. In [83], an attempt has been
made to analyze the transformer performance under the overfluxing conditions by
using 3-D FEM transient formulation. In this work, a 2 MVA, 11/0.433 kV
transformer has been simulated under the 10% continuous overfluxing condition.
The temperature rise of frame is calculated by thermal analysis which uses the loss
values obtained in the electromagnetic analysis. The flux density distribution
(arrow plot) is shown in figure 5.33 (at the instant when R phase voltage is at the
positive peak, and Y and B phase voltages are at half the negative peak value).

Figure 5.33 Flux density distribution during overfluxing condition

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

218

Chapter 5

Figure 5.34 Eddy current distribution in frame

Some amount of flux in the yoke spills over and hits the frame part facing the
yoke above the R phase winding, which is confirmed by the plot of distribution of
eddy currents in the frame as shown in figure 5.34. The effect of yoke
reinforcement on the overfluxing performance has also been analyzed. The frame
loss with yoke reinforcement is considerably less than that without it. The
temperature rise of the frame is calculated by using the method described in
Section 5.10.1. The solution is obtained by an iterative process as follows. Some
initial value of temperature rise is assumed. The oil film temperature (the average
of frame and oil temperatures) is calculated. The properties of oil, at this
temperature, are used to calculate the Rayleigh and Nusselt numbers. The heat
transfer coefficient is then calculated by using equation 5.40, and subsequently the
temperature rise (Δθ) is calculated by equation 5.41. The procedure is repeated till
Δθ converges. Thus, the performance of a transformer under the overfluxing
conditions can be assessed by calculating temperature rise of various structural
components by this procedure. The method described is based on some
approximations. The effect of eddy currents in the core on the field is neglected.
Also, the core is modeled as an isotropic material. The core needs to be modeled
more exactly using anisotropic properties of permeability and conductivity in x, y
and z directions. An appreciable amount of flux flows into the air paths, only
during the portion of the cycle when the core gets saturated. Therefore, the
waveform of the air-flux is of pulse-like form. This type of waveform has a high
harmonic content increasing the winding eddy loss considerably, which needs to
be calculated accurately. The simulation of overvoltage condition, say 125% for 1
minute or 140% for 5 seconds, as specified in technical requirements by users,
may necessitate the use of a coupled circuit-field formulation.

5.12 Load Loss Measurement
The dependence of stray losses on various factors has been discussed in Section
5.1. The stray losses are quite sensitive to the magnitude of load current,
temperature and frequency. In a very competitive market scenario, as it exists
today, designers may be forced to keep a very small margin between the
guaranteed and calculated values of the load loss in order to optimize the material
cost. The penalty for every kW exceeded is quite high, and it is important to
understand the effects of various design, manufacturing and test conditions on the
stray losses (and the measured load loss).
The accuracy of measurement of the load loss in power transformers is an
important issue. With the increase in loss capitalization rates, many of the large

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

219

power transformers are being designed with lower losses (due to improved design
and manufacturing techniques and/or higher material content used). This has the
effect of improving further the efficiency of already quite efficient transformers
(as compared to most of the other electrical equipment) lowering their power
factor. At very low power factors, a small phase angle error in current or voltage
transformers can cause a large error in the measurement of the real power
[58,84,85]. During the load loss measurement of large power transformers, where
a power factor of 0.015 is not uncommon, a phase angle error of 1 minute results
in an error of 1.9% in the measured load loss. As the power factor reduces, the
error increases.
Sometimes at sites, the impedance measurement test is done (with the available
low voltage source) as one of the investigative tests. Care should be taken that the
voltage should not be too low, which otherwise results in the core operation near
the origin of B-H curve, where the permeability can be quite low decreasing the
magnetizing reactance [86]. In Chapter 1, we have seen that the shunt branch in
the transformer equivalent circuit is neglected while estimating the leakage
reactance from the short circuit test. If the test is done at a site with a very low
voltage, the effect of magnetizing reactance cannot be neglected and may have
some noticeable influence on the leakage reactance measurement.
The losses occurring at the site under the rated voltage and current conditions
can be noticeably different than that measured during the open circuit (no-load
loss) and short circuit (load loss) tests. This is because the amount of leakage flux
completing its path through the core (and causing extra stray losses in it) depends
on the load power factor. At different time instants as the flux density in the core
varies from zero to the peak value, the core permeability also varies. The load
power factor decides the phase angle between the main (mutual) flux and stray
flux, and hence the path of leakage flux [61,87] and the magnitude of stray losses
in the core. For example, when the load is inductive, the stray flux (in phase with
the load current) lags the terminal voltage by 90°. The main flux in the core also
lags the terminal voltage by approximately 90°. Hence, the main flux and leakage
flux are almost in phase. When the main flux is at its maximum value, the core
permeability is low and the leakage flux finds an alternate path reducing the core
stray losses.
We will now discuss two typical phenomena observed during the load loss
measurement.

5.12.1 Half-turn effect
In single-phase transformers with unwound end limbs, (e.g., single-phase threelimb transformer), the tested load loss value can be higher than the calculated
value due to extra losses occurring in the core on account of the half-turn effect.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

220

Chapter 5

Figure 5.35 Half-turn effect in single-phase three-limb transformer

This phenomenon is particularly observed in autotransformers, in which high
voltage (HV) and intermediate voltage (IV) bushings are fitted on the tank cover
on the opposite sides of the core. In this case, either common winding (IV) and/ or
series winding (HV) of the autotransformer will contain a half-turn if the lead
crosses the core to the opposite side for the termination. In figure 5.35, one such
arrangement resulting into a half-turn in a winding is shown. In double wound
transformers (non-auto) also, the half-turn effect is present if the line and neutral
terminals are not on the same side of the core for any of the two windings. The
half-turn effect becomes clearly evident during the ratio test (done phase-byphase) in three-phase three-limb transformers. For an arrangement of three phases
R, Y and B from left to right with turns of the windings wound in the clockwise
direction (looking from top), if neutral and line leads are on opposite sides, R
phase does not have the half-turn effect as the last turn while going on the opposite
side does not cross the core window. Hence, the turns ratio measured on R phase
will be less than the other two phases. Thus, if there are physically, say 500½ turns
in the winding, the R phase turns ratio will correspond to 500 turns, the Y phase
turns ratio will correspond to 500½ turns (the last Y phase turn links only half the
core flux while crossing), and the B phase turns ratio will correspond to 501 turns
(the last B phase turn links the full core flux while crossing). During the threephase load loss measurement in a three-phase three-limb transformer, the net flux
due to these unbalances in three phases has to pass through yokes and air-path
since the limbs will not allow this flux in them due to a short-circuited winding on
them. Since the air path has extremely high reluctance, a negligible flux would be
set up in the path (yokes plus air-path) adding no extra loss during the load loss
measurement.
In a single-phase three-limb transformer, a low reluctance magnetic path
consisting of yokes and end limbs is available for the half ampere-turn (half turn
multiplied by the corresponding current) to set up an appreciable flux in this
closed path as shown in figure 5.36.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

221

Figure 5.36 Circulating flux due to half-turn effect

Let us calculate the extra losses on account of this circulating flux for a 66.67
MVA,
kV single-phase autotransformer having a halfturn in the HV series winding with 334 turns. The IV common winding has 500
turns, giving a total of 834 turns in IV common and HV series windings
(corresponding to the HV voltage of
kV). The no-load current in today’s
very efficient transformers with the availability of ever improving core materials,
can be as low as 0.1% of the rated current. The rated current of the HV winding is
524.9 A giving a no-load current of 0.525 A, which is required to set up the rated
flux density of, say, 1.7 T. The magnetizing ampere-turns are therefore 438
(=0.525×834) to set up 1.7 T in the entire core. For a given flux density, less
ampere-turns will be required for the path consisting of yokes and end limbs as
compared to the entire core. Hence, ampere-turns of 262.45 (= 524.9/2),
corresponding to the half-turn effect during the load loss measurement (with rated
current flowing in the windings), will set up a flux density (in the path of yokes
and end limbs) of about rated value resulting in an extra core loss. This
approximate calculation shows that the core loss value of the order of rated noload loss of the transformer occurs and gets additionally measured during the load
loss test when the half-turn effect is present.
During investigative tests, phase-by-phase load loss measurements are
sometimes done on three-phase three-limb transformers. If one of the windings is
having the half-turn effect, the value of load loss for the middle phase Y (with
windings of R and B phases open-circuited) is quite high as compared to that of R
and B phases. This is because it becomes a case of single-phase three-limb
transformer with extra core losses occurring in the limbs of R and B phases and
yokes due to the half-turn effect. The voltage induced in the open-circuited
windings of R and B phases can be quite high depending upon the value of flux
density induced in R and B phase limbs due to the half-turn flux [88].
In case of three-phase five-limb transformers, due to presence of end yokes and
end limbs, a resultant flux under the combined action of the half-turn effects of
three phases flows in the magnetic path formed by yokes and end limbs. In this
path the three fluxes (corresponding to three phases) tend to cancel each other
being displaced in phase by 120°, resulting in no extra core loss during the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

222

Chapter 5

three-phase load loss measurement under balanced load conditions. Under
appreciable unbalanced load conditions (e.g., at site), the effects of three-phase
fluxes will not cancel and there will be extra core loss, the value of which will
depend on the amount of unbalance between three phases.
If countermeasures are not taken, the half-turn effect will result into an
unacceptable value of load loss during the factory test and excessive overfluxing/
temperature rise of the core in service. The half-turn effect, if present, can be
eliminated in the case of single-phase three-limb transformers by winding a few
compensating turns on the end limbs. The direction of winding these turns should
be same on both the end limbs as shown in figure 5.37 so that the main (mutual)
useful flux induces a voltage in them in the same direction and hence they can be
paralleled (connection of A1 to B1 and A2 to B2). The net voltage in the loop A1 A2 B2
B1 A1 is zero resulting in zero value of circulating current, and hence the main flux
flows unhindered. On the contrary, the flux due to the half-turn effect links these
two windings on the two end limbs in opposite directions. This induces voltages in
opposite directions in these two compensating windings causing a circulating
current to flow (as shown by the arrows in figure 5.37), which opposes its cause,
viz. the flux due to the half-turn effect. Thus, the half-turn effect gets nullifled and
there is no extra core loss during the load loss measurement, except for the small
copper loss in the compensating turns due to the circulating current. The current in
the compensating turns is equal to I1/(2n), where I1 is the current in the winding
having the half-turn effect during the load loss measurement and n is the number
of compensating turns on each end limb. The cross section of the turns should be
designed to carry this much amount of current.
Another way of avoiding the half-turn effect in autotransformers with HV and
IV terminals on opposite sides of the core is to take the terminal of the winding
with half-turn to the opposite side through space between the core and tank
without crossing the core window. This alternative may become quite costly
because extra space and material content are required (since adequate insulation
clearances have to be provided for routing high voltage leads).

Figure 5.37 Compensating turns

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

223

Figure 5.38 Single-phase load loss measurement on three-phase transformer

It is to be noted that the half-turn effect in three-phase five-limb transformers,
which becomes significant under appreciable unbalanced load conditions, cannot
be eliminated by the arrangement of compensating turns shown in figure 5.37
since the main fluxes in the two end limbs are not in phase.
5.12.2 Single-phase load loss measurement on a three-phase
transformer
In three-phase transformers with a delta connected winding, one peculiar
phenomenon is observed during the investigative test of single-phase load loss
measurement. The path of leakage flux for two cases is shown in figure 5.38. The
path is influenced by the fact that the resultant flux linkages of a short-circuited
winding are nearly zero.
When the inner winding is excited and the outer winding is short-circuited, the
path of leakage field predominantly consists of the leakage channel (gap between
two windings) and the core limb of the same phase. On the contrary, when the
outer winding is excited and the inner winding is short-circuited, there is no flux in
the core limb of the phase under test in order to satisfy the zero resultant flux
linkage condition for the inner winding. Thus, with the inner winding shortcircuited, the path of the leakage flux predominantly consists of the leakage
channel, yokes, limbs of other two phases and tank.
Let us consider a case of the delta connected inner short-circuited winding with
the impedance voltage applied to the outer star connected winding. When the
leakage flux tries to complete its path through the limbs of other two phases, the
voltages are induced in these phases on the delta side, which results in a
circulating current in the closed delta. This current produces a counteracting flux
forcing the initial flux out of the core, which is forced to complete its path through
yoke, air-path and tank causing extra stray losses in tank and I2R loss in the delta
winding. There is also a reduction in the leakage reactance. Hence, the extra losses
measured or the lower value of leakage reactance in such a case should not be
mistaken as some defect in the transformer. These extra losses during the singlephase load loss measurements can be avoided by doing single phase load loss

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

224

Chapter 5

measurement by exciting the inner delta winding and short-circuiting the outer
winding.

References
1. Turowski, J., Turowski, M., and Kopec, M. Method of three-dimensional
network solution of leakage field of three-phase transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 26, No. 5, September 1990, pp. 2911–
2919.
2. Jezierski, E. and Turowski, J. Dependence of stray losses on current and
temperature, CIGRE 1964, Report 102, pp. 1–13.
3. Stoll, R.L. The analysis of eddy currents, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1974.
4. Karsai, K., Kerenyi, D., and Kiss, L. Large power transformers, Elsevier
Publication, Amsterdam, 1987.
5. Jain, M.P. and Ray, L.M. Field pattern and associated losses in aluminum
sheet in presence of strip bus bars, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-89, No. 7 September/October 1970, pp.1525–
1539.
6. Sykulski, J.K. Computational magnetics, Chapman and Hall, London,
1995.
7. Deuring, W.G. Induced losses in steel plates in the presence of an alternating current, AIEE Transactions, June 1957, pp. 166–173.
8. Allan, D.J., Mullineux, N., and Reed, J.R. Some effects of eddy currents
in aluminum transformer tanks, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 120, No. 6, June
1973, pp. 681–685.
9. Kozlowski, M. and Turowski, J. Stray losses and local overheating hazard in transformers, CIGRE 1972, Paper No. 12–10.
10. Girgis, R.S., teNyenhuis, E.G., and Beaster, B. Proposed standards for
frequency conversion factors of transformer performance parameters,
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 18, No. 4, October 2003, pp.
1262–1267.
11. Hwang, M.S., Grady, W.M., and Sanders, H.W. Distribution transformer
winding losses due to non-sinusoidal currents, IEEE Transactions on
Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-2, No. 1, January 1987, pp. 140–146.
12. Kulkarni, S.V. and Khaparde, S.A. Stray loss evaluation in power transformers-a review, IEEE PES Winter Meeting 2000, Singapore, January
2000, Paper No. 0–7803–5938–0/00.
13. Boyajian, A. Leakage reactance of irregular distributions of transformer
windings by the method of double Fourier series, AIEE Transactions—
Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 73, Pt. III-B, October 1954, pp.
1078–1086.
14. Brauer, J.R. Finite element analysis of electromagnetic induction in
transformers, IEEE PES Winter Power Meeting, New York, January
1977, Paper A77–122–5.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

225

15. Andersen, O.W. Finite element solution of skin effect and eddy current
problems, IEEE PES Summer Power Meeting, Mexico City, July 1977,
Paper A77–616–6.
16. Sato, T., Inui, Y., and Saito, S. Solution of magnetic field, eddy current
and circulating current problems, taking magnetic saturation and effect
of eddy current and circulating current paths into account, IEEE PES
Winter Power Meeting, New York, January/February 1977, Paper A77–
168–8.
17. Babare, A., Di Napoli, A., and Santini, E. A method for losses evaluation
in large power transformer tanks, Electromagnetic fields in electrical engineering, Book edited by Savini, A. and Turowski, J., Plenum Press,
New York, 1988, pp. 95–100.
18. Komulainen, R. and Nordman, H. Loss evaluation and the use of magnetic and electromagnetic shields in transformers, CIGRE 1988, Paper
No. 12–03.
19. Pavlik, D., Johnson, D.C., and Girgis, R.S. Calculation and reduction of
stray and eddy losses in core-form transformers using a highly accurate
finite element modeling technique, IEEE Transactions Power Delivery,
Vol. 8, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 239–245.
20. Sironi, G.G. and Van Hulse, J.R. Eddy current losses in solid iron pieces
under three-dimensional magnetic field, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. MAG-14, No. 5, September 1978, pp. 377–379.
21. El Nahas, I., Szabados, B., Findlay, R.D., Poloujadoff, M., Lee, S.,
Burke, P., and Perco, D. Three dimensional flux calculation on a 3-phase
transformer, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-1, No. 3,
July l986, pp. 156–159.
22. Junyou, Y., Renyuan, T., Yan, L., and Yongbin, C. Eddy current fields and
overheating problems due to heavy current carrying conductors, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 1994, pp. 3064–
3067.
23. Renyuan, T., Junyou, Y., Feng, L., and Yongping, L. Solutions of threedimensional multiply connected and open boundary problems by BEM
in three-phase combination transformers, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 1992, pp. 1340–1343.
24. Renyuan, T., Junyou, Y., Zhouxiong, W., Feng, L., Chunrong, L., and
Zihong, X. Computation of eddy current losses by heavy current leads
and windings in large transformers using IEM coupled with improved Rψ method, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 26, No. 2, March 1990,
pp. 493–496.
25. Higuchi, Y. and Koizumi, M. Integral equation method with surface impedance model for 3-D eddy current analysis in transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2000, pp. 774–779.
26. Yongbin, C., Junyou, Y., Hainian, Y., and Renyuan, T. Study of eddy current losses and shielding measures in large power transformers, IEEE

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

226

Chapter 5

Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 30, No. 5, September 1994, pp. 3068–
3071.
27. Krawczyk, A. and Turowski, J. Recent developments in eddy current
analysis, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. MAG-23, No. 5, September 1987, pp. 3032–3037.
28. Carpenter, C.J. Theory of flux penetration into laminated iron and associated losses, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 124, No. 7, July 1977, pp. 659–664.
29. Hemmings, R.F. and Wale, G.D. Heating in transformer cores due to radial leakage flux, Part-I: Experimental models and test results, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 124, No. 11, November 1977, pp. 1064–1072.
30. Carpenter, C.J., Sharples, K.O., and Djurovic, M. Heating in transformer
cores due to radial leakage flux, Part-II: Computed results, Proceedings
IEE, Vol. 124, No. 12, December 1977, pp. 1181–1186.
31. Kerenyi, D. Stray load losses in yoke-beams of transformers, Electromagnetic fields in electrical engineering, Book edited by Savini, A. and
Turowski, J., Plenum Press, New York, 1988, pp. 113–118.
32. Turowski, J. Technical Electrodynamics, (in Polish), WNT, Warszawa,
1993.
33. Kerenyi, D. Approximate formula for the eddy current losses induced in
rectangular metal blocks by magnetic fields, GANZ Electric Review, No.
16, 1987, pp. 13–22.
34. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Srinivas, P.N., Khaparde, S.A., and Jain,
R. Evaluation of flitch plate losses in power transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 14, No. 3, July 1999, pp. 996–1001.
35. Kulkarni, S.V. Stray losses in power transformer: evaluation and experimental verification, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT-Bombay, India, 2000.
36. Vogel, F.J. and Adolphson, E.J. A stray loss problem in transformer
tanks, AIEE Transactions, August 1954, pp. 760–764.
37. Berezovski, A.A. The calculation of stray losses in transformer tanks,
Elektrichestvo, No. 9, 1966, pp. 1–7.
38. Valkovic, Z. Calculation of the losses in three-phase transformer tanks,
Proceedings IEE., Vol. 127, Pt. C, No. 1, January 1980, pp. 20–25.
39. Szabados, B., El Nahas, L, El Sobki, M.S., Findlay, R.D., and
Poloujadoff, M. A new approach to determine eddy current losses in the
tank walls of a power transformer, IEEE Transaction on Power Delivery,
Vol. PWRD-2, No. 3, July 1987, pp. 810–816.
40. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., and Turowski, J. Industrial verification
of 3D hybrid analytically-numerical calculation of stray field and losses
in 3-phase power transformers, International Symposium on Electromagnetic Fields, ISEF ‘95, Thessaloniki, Greece, September 1995, pp. 345–
348.
41. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., and Turowski, J. Fast 3-D interactive
computation of stray field and losses in asymmetric transformers,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

227

Proceedings IEE–Generation, Transmission and Distribution, Vol. 147,
No. 4, July 2000, pp. 197–201.
42. Zwolinski, G., Turowski, J., Kulkarni, S.V., and Koppikar, D.A. Method of
fast computation of 3D stray field and losses in highly asymmetric transformers, International Conference on Transformers, TRAFOTECH ’98,
Mumbai, 23–24 January 1998, pp. I 51–58.
43. Dexin, X., Yunqiu, T., and Zihong, X.FEM analysis of 3D eddy current
field in power transformer, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. MAG23, No. 5, September 1987, pp. 3786–3788.
44. Holland, S.A., O’Connell, G.P., and Haydock, L. Calculating stray losses
in power transformers using surface impedance with finite elements,
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 28, No. 2, March 1992, pp. 1355–
1358.
45. Savini, A. and Turowski, J. Influence of structure geometry, screens and
eddy currents on the critical distance of tank wall in power transformers,
Electromagnetic fields in electrical engineering, Book edited by Savini,
A. and Turowski, J., Plenum Press, New York, 1988, pp. 119–127.
46. Turowski, J. Overheating hazard in flanged bolt joints of transformers,
International Symposium on Electromagnetic Fields, ISEF’85, Warsaw,
Poland, 1985, pp. 271–274.
47. Saito, S., Inagaki, K., Sato, T., Inui, Y., Okuyama, K., and Otani, H. Eddy
currents in structure surrounding large current bushings of a large capacity transformer, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems,
Vol. PAS-100, No. 11, November 1981, pp. 4502–4509.
48. Furman, Y.I., Bereza, V.L., Ivankov, V.F., and Nizhnik, L.P. Losses in
tanks of large power transformers caused by magnetic field, and methods
of their reduction, CIGRE 1988, Paper No. 12–07.
49. Turowski, J. and Pelikant, A. Eddy current losses and hot spot evaluation
in cover plates of power transformers, Proceedings IEE—Electrical
Power Applications, Vol. 144, No. 6, November 1997, pp. 435–440.
50. Olivares, J.C., Escarela, R., Kulkarni, S.V., de Leon, F., Melgoza, E., and
Hernandez, O. Improved insert geometry for reducing tank wall losses in
pad-mounted transformers, Accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery.
51. Poritsky, H. and Jerrard, R.P. Eddy current losses in a semi-infinite solid
due to a nearby alternating current, AIEE Transactions, May 1954, pp.
97–106.
52. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Khaparde, S.A., and Jha, S.K. Evaluation of eddy losses due to high current leads in transformers, Proceedings IEE–Science Measurement and Technology, Vol. 144, No. 1, January
1997, pp. 34–38.
53. Krakowski, M.R., Kazmierski, M., and Kersz, I. Effect of current distribution in parallel bars on electromagnetic field at nearby steel wall, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 136, Pt. B, No. 4, July 1989, pp. 161–167.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

228

Chapter 5

54. Lowther, D.A. and Silvester, P.P. Computer aided design in Magnetics,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985, pp. 213–215.
55. Olivares, J.C., Canedo, J., Moreno, P., Driesen, J., Escarela, R., and
Palanivasagam, S. Experimental study to reduce the distribution transformer stray losses using electromagnetic shields, Electric Power Systems Research, 63 (2002), pp. 1–7.
56. Tagaki, T., Ishii, T., Okada, T., Kurita, K., Tamura, R., and Murata, H.
Reliability improvement of 500 kV large capacity power transformer,
CIGRE 1978, Paper No. 12–02.
57. Kerr, H.W. and Palmer, S. Developments in the design of large power
transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 111, No. 4, April 1964, pp. 823–
832.
58. Beaumont R. Losses in transformers and reactors, CIGRE 1988, Paper
No. 12–10.
59. Kozlowski, M. and Turowski, J. Stray losses and local overheating hazard in transformers, CIGRE 1972, Paper No. 12–10.
60. Kazmierski, M., Kozlowski, M., Lasocinski, J., Pinkiewicz, I., and
Turowski, J. Hot spot identification and overheating hazard preventing
when designing a large transformer, CIGRE 1984, Paper No. 12–12.
61. Bose, A.K., Kroon, C., and Hulsink, G. Some topics on designing transformers with low load losses, CIGRE 1988, Paper No. 12–05.
62. Inui, Y., Saito, S., Okuyama, K., and Hiraishi, K. Effect of tank and tank
shields on magnetic fields and stray losses in transformer windings,
IEEE PES Summer Meeting, Vancouver, Canada, July 1973, Paper No.
C73–401–7.
63. Takahashi, N., Kitamura, T., Horii, M., and Takehara, J. Optimal design
of tank shield model of transformer, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics,
Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2000, pp. 1089–1093.
64. Bereza, V.L. Designing magnetic shields for transformer tanks,
Elektroteknika, Vol. 52, No. 12, 1981, pp. 44–46.
65. Barton, M.L. Loss calculation in laminated steel utilizing anisotropic
magnetic permeability, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-99, No. 3, May/June 1980, pp. 1280–1287.
66. Silva, V.C., Meunier, G., and Foggia, A.A 3-D finite element computation of eddy current and losses in laminated iron cores allowing for electric and magnetic anisotropy, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 31,
No. 3, May 1995, pp. 2139–2141.
67. Djurovic, M. and Carpenter, C.J. Three dimensional computation of
transformer leakage fields and associated losses, IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, Vol. MAG-11, No. 5, September 1975, pp. 1535–1537.
68. Djurovic, M. and Monson, J.E. Three dimensional computation of the
effect of the horizontal magnetic shunt on transformer leakage fields,
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. MAG-13, No. 5, September 1977,
pp. 1137–1139.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Stray Losses in Structural Components

229

69. Djurovic, M. and Monson, J.E. Stray losses in the step of a transformer
yoke with a horizontal magnetic shunt, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-101, No. 8, August 1982, pp. 2995–
3000.
70. Rizzo, M., Savini, A., and Turowski, J. Influence of flux collectors on
stray losses in transformers, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 36,
No. 4, July 2000, pp. 1915–1918.
71. Harrison, T.H. and Richardson, B. Transformer loss reductions, CIGRE
1988, Paper No. 12–04.
72. Mullineux, N. and Reed, J.R. Eddy current shielding of transformer
tanks, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 113, No. 5, May 1966, pp. 815–818.
73. Woolley, I. Eddy current losses in reactor flux shields, Proceedings IEE,
Vol. 117, No. 11, November 1970, pp. 2142–2150.
74. Holman, J.P. Heat transfer, McGraw-Hill Company, Singapore, 1986.
75. Churchill, S.W. and Chu, H.H.S. Correlating equations for laminar and
turbulent free convection from a vertical plate, International Journal
Heat Mass Transfer, Vol. 18, 1975, pp. 1323–1329.
76. Niewierowicz, N. and Turowski, J. New thermometric method of measuring power losses in solid metal elements, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 119, No.
5, May 1972, pp. 629–636.
77. Alexander, G.W., Corbin, S L., and McNutt, W.J. Influence of design and
operating practices on excitation of generator step-up transformers,
IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-85, No.
8, August 1966, pp. 901–909.
78. Stuehm, D.L., Mork, B. A, and Mairs, D.D. Five-legged core transformer
equivalent circuit, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 4, No. 3,
July l989, pp. 1786–1793.
79. Mairs, D.D., Stuehm, D.L., and Mork, B.A. Overvoltages on five-legged
core transformer on rural electric systems, IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, Vol. 25, No. 2, March/April 1989, pp. 366–370.
80. Arthuri, C.M. Transient simulation and analysis of a three-phase fivelimb step-up transformer, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 6,
No. 1, January 1991, pp. 196–203.
81. Chen, X.S. and Neudorfer, P. Digital model for transient studies of a
three-phase five-legged transformer, Proceedings IEE, Pt. C, Vol. 139,
No.4, July 1992, pp. 351–358.
82. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Khaparde, S.A., and Arora, B. A modified approach to overfluxing analysis of transformer, International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, Elsevier Science Publication, Vol. 20, No. 4, 1998, pp. 235–239.
83. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., and Khaparde, S.A. Overfluxing simulation of transformer by 3D-FEM analysis, Fourth Conference on EHV
Technology, IISc Bangalore, India, 17–18 July 1998, pp. 69–71.
84. Specht, T.R., Rademacher, L.B., and Moore, H.R. Measurement of iron

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

230

Chapter 5

and copper losses in transformers, AIEE Transactions, August 1958, pp.
470–476.
85. Mehta, S.P. Measurement of transformer losses, IEEE Winter Meeting,
Paper No. EHO209–7/84/0000–0043, 1983, pp. 43–52.
86. Lachman, M.F. and Shafir, Y.N. Influence of single-phase excitation and
magnetizing reactance on transformer leakage reactance measurement,
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 12, No. 4, October 1997, pp.
1538–1545.
87. Bose, A.K., Kroon, C., and Wildeboer, J. The loading of the magnetic
circuit, CIGRE 1978, Paper No. 12–09.
88. Mohseni, H. and Hamdad, F. Overvoltage caused by winding terminal
arrangement of three-phase power transformer, International Symposium
on High Voltage Engineering, Austria, 1995, pp. 6757:1–4.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

6
Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

The continuous increase in demand of electrical power has resulted in the addition
of more generating capacity and interconnections in power systems. Both these
factors have contributed to an increase in short circuit capacity of networks,
making the short circuit duty of transformers more severe. Failure of transformers
due to short circuits is a major concern of transformer users. The success rate
during actual short circuit tests is far from satisfactory. The test data from high
power test laboratories around the world indicates that on an average practically
one transformer out of four has failed during the short circuit test, and the failure
rate is above 40% for transformers above 100 MVA rating [1]. There are
continuous efforts by manufacturers and users to improve the short circuit
withstand performance of transformers. A number of suggestions have been made
in the literature for improving technical specifications, verification methods and
manufacturing processes to enhance reliability of transformers under short
circuits. The short circuit strength of a transformer enables it to survive throughfault currents due to external short circuits in a power system network; an
inadequate strength may lead to a mechanical collapse of windings, deformation/
damage to clamping structures, and may eventually lead to an electrical fault in
the transformer itself. The internal faults initiated by the external short circuits are
dangerous as they may involve blow-out of bushings, bursting of tank, fire hazard,
etc. The short circuit design is one of the most important and challenging aspects
of the transformer design; it has been the preferential subject in many CIGRE
Conferences including the recent session (year 2000).
Revision has been done in IEC 60076–5 standard, second edition 2000–07,
reducing the limit of change in impedance from 2% to 1% for category III (above
100 MVA rating) transformers. This change is in line with the results of many

231
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

232

Chapter 6

recent short circuit tests on power transformers greater than 100 MVA, in which
an increase of short circuit inductance beyond 1% has caused significant
deformation in windings. This revision has far reaching implications for
transformer manufacturers. A much stricter control on the variations in materials
and manufacturing processes will have to be exercised to avoid looseness and
winding movements.
This chapter first introduces the basic theory of short circuits as applicable to
transformers. The thermal capability of transformer windings under short circuit
forces is also discussed. There are basically two types of forces in windings: axial
and radial electromagnetic forces produced by radial and axial leakage fields
respectively. Analytical and numerical methods for calculation of these forces are
discussed. Various failure mechanisms due to these forces are then described. It is
very important to understand the dynamic response of a winding to axial
electromagnetic forces. Practical difficulties encountered in the dynamic analysis
and recent thinking on the whole issue of demonstration of short circuit withstand
capability are enumerated. Design parameters and manufacturing processes have
pronounced effect on natural frequencies of a winding. Design aspects of winding
and clamping structures are elucidated. Precautions to be taken during design and
manufacturing of transformers for improving short circuit withstand capability
are given.

6.1 Short Circuit Currents
There are different types of faults which result into high over currents, viz. singleline-to-ground fault, line-to-line fault with or without simultaneous ground fault
and three-phase fault with or without simultaneous ground fault. When the ratio of
zero-sequence impedance to positive-sequence impedance is less than one, a
single-line-to-ground fault results in higher fault current than a three-phase fault.
It is shown in [2] that for a particular case of YNd connected transformer with a
delta connected inner winding, the single-line-to-ground fault is more severe.
Except for such specific cases, usually the three-phase fault (which is a
symmetrical fault) is the most severe one. Hence, it is usual practice to design a
transformer to withstand a three-phase short circuit at its terminals, the other
windings being assumed to be connected to infinite systems/sources (of constant
voltage). The symmetrical short circuit current for a three-phase two-winding
transformer is given by
(6.1)

where V is rated line-to-line voltage in kV, ZT is short circuit impedance of the
transformer, and ZS is short circuit impedance of the system given by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

233

(6.2)
where SF is short circuit apparent power of the system in MVA and S is three-phase
rating of the transformer in MVA. Usually, the system impedance is quite small as
compared to the transformer impedance and can be neglected, giving an extra
safety margin. In per-unit quantities using sequence notations we get
(6.3)
where Z1 is positive-sequence impedance of the transformer (which is leakage
impedance to positive-sequence currents calculated as per the procedure given in
Section 3.1 of Chapter 3) and VpF is pre-fault voltage. If the pre-fault voltages are
assumed to be 1.0 per-unit (p.u.) then for a three-phase solid fault (with a zero
value of fault impedance) we get

(6.4)
The sequence components of currents and voltages are [3]
(6.5)
For a solid single-line-to-ground fault on phase a,
(6.6)
Ia0=Ia1=Ia2=Ia/3

(6.7)

where Z2 and Z0 are negative-sequence and zero-sequence impedances of the
transformer respectively. For a transformer, which is a static device, the positive
and negative-sequence impedances are equal (Z 1=Z 2). The procedures for
calculation of the positive and zero-sequence impedances are given in Chapter 3.
For a line-to-line fault (between phases b and c),
(6.8)

(6.9)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

234

Chapter 6

and for a double-line-to-ground fault,

(6.10)

Since a three-phase short circuit is usually the most severe fault, it is sufficient if
the withstand capability against three-phase short circuit forces is ensured.
However, if there is an unloaded tertiary winding in a three-winding transformer,
its design must be done by taking into account the short circuit forces during a
single-line-to-ground fault on either LV or HV winding. Hence, most of the
discussions hereafter are for the three-phase and single-line-to-ground fault
conditions. Based on the equations written earlier for the sequence voltages and
currents for these two types of faults, we can interconnect the positive-sequence,
negative-sequence and zero-sequence networks as shown in figure 6.1. The
solution of the resulting network yields the symmetrical components of currents
and voltages in windings under fault conditions [4].

Figure 6.1 Sequence networks

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

235

The calculation of three-phase fault current is straight-forward, whereas the
calculation of single-line-to-ground fault current requires the estimation of zerosequence reactances and interconnection of the three sequence networks at the
correct points. The calculation of fault current for two transformers under the
single-line-to-ground fault condition is described now.
Consider a case of delta/star (HV winding in delta and LV winding in star with
grounded neutral) distribution transformer with a single-line-to-ground fault on
LV side. The equivalent network under the fault condition is shown in figure 6.2
(a), where the three sequence networks are connected at the points of fault
(corresponding LV terminals). The impedances denoted with subscript S are the
system impedances; for example Z1HS is the positive-sequence system impedance
on HV side. The impedances Z1HL, Z2HL and Z0HL are the positive-sequence,
negative-sequence and zero-sequence impedances respectively between HV and
LV windings. The zero-sequence network shows open circuit on HV system side
because the zero-sequence impedance is infinitely large as viewed/measured from
a delta side as explained in Chapter 3 (Section 3.7). When there is no in-feed from
LV side (no source on LV side), system impedances are effectively infinite and the
network simplifies to that given in figure 6.2 (b). Further, if the system
impedances on HV side are very small as compared to the inter-winding
impedances, they can be neglected giving the sequence components and fault
current as (fault assumed on a phase)

Figure 6.2 Single-line-to-ground fault on star side of delta/star transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

236

Chapter 6

(6.11)

(6.12)

Now, let us consider a three-winding transformer with an unloaded tertiary
winding (HV and LV windings are star connected with their neutrals grounded,
and tertiary winding is delta connected). The interconnection of sequence
networks is shown in figure 6.3 (a). A single-line-to-ground fault is considered on
phase a of LV winding. Since it is a three-winding transformer, the corresponding
star equivalent circuits are inserted at appropriate places in the network. In the
positive-sequence and negative-sequence networks, the tertiary is shown opencircuited because it is unloaded; only in the zero-sequence network the tertiary is
in the circuit since the zero-sequence currents can flow in a closed delta. If the prefault currents are neglected, both the sources in positive-sequence network are
equal to 1 per-unit voltage. The network gets simplified to that shown in figure 6.3
(b). The positive-sequence impedance is
Z1=(Z1HS+Z1H+Z1L)//Z1LS

(6.13)

where Z1HS and Z1LS are positive-sequence system impedances, and Z1H and Z1L are
positive-sequence impedances of HV and LV windings respectively in the star
equivalent circuit.

Figure 6.3 Single-line-to-ground fault in three-winding transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

237

Similarly, the negative-sequence and zero-sequence impedances are given by
Z2=(Z2HS+Z2H+Z2L)//Z2LS

(6.14)

Z0=([(Z0HS+Z0H)//Z0T]+Z0L)//Z0LS

(6.15)

The impedances Z1 and Z2 are equal because the corresponding positive-sequence
and negative-sequence impedances in their expressions are equal. The total fault
current is then calculated as
If=3/(Z1+Z2+Z0)

(6.16)

The fault current in any of the windings is calculated by adding the corresponding
sequence currents flowing in them in the three sequence networks. For example,
the current in phase a of HV winding is sum of the currents flowing through the
impedances Z1H, Z2H and Z0H of the positive-sequence, negative-sequence and
zero-sequence networks respectively. The tertiary winding current is only the
zero-sequence current flowing through the impedance Z0T.
An unloaded tertiary winding is used for the stabilizing purpose as discussed in
Chapter 3. Since its terminals are not usually brought out, an external short circuit
is not possible and it may not be necessary to design it for withstanding a short
circuit at its own terminals. However, the above analysis of single-line-to-ground
fault in a three-winding transformer has shown that the tertiary winding must be
able to withstand the forces produced in it by asymmetrical fault on LV or HV
winding. Consider a case of star/star connected transformer with a delta connected
tertiary winding, in which a single-line-to-ground fault occurs on the LV side
whose neutral is grounded. If there is no in-feed from the LV side (no source on
the LV side), with reference to figure 6.3, the impedances Z1LS, Z2LS and Z0LS will be
infinite. There will be open circuit on the HV side in the zero-sequence network
since HV neutral is not grounded in the case being considered. If these
modifications are done in figure 6.3, it can be seen that the faulted LV winding
carries all the three sequence currents, whereas the tertiary winding carries only
the zero-sequence current. Since all the three sequence currents are equal for a
single-line-to-ground fault condition (equation 6.7), the tertiary winding carries
one-third of ampere-turns of the faulted LV winding. As explained in Chapter 3, an
unloaded tertiary winding is used to stabilize the neutral voltage under asymmetrical
loading conditions. The load on each phase of the tertiary winding is equal to onethird of a single-phase/unbalanced load applied on one of the main windings.
Hence, the rating of the unloaded tertiary winding is commonly taken as one-third of
the rating of the main windings. In single-line-to-ground fault conditions, the
conductor of the tertiary winding chosen according to this rule should also help the
tertiary winding in withstanding forces under a single-line-to-ground fault

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

238

Chapter 6

condition in most of the cases. This is particularly true for the case discussed
previously in which the neutral terminal of one of the main windings is grounded
(in this case the tertiary winding carries one-third of ampere-turns of the faulted
winding). For the other connections of windings and neutral grounding
conditions, the value of zero-sequence current flowing in the tertiary winding
depends on the relative values of impedances of windings and system impedances
in the zero-sequence network. For example, in the above case if the HV neutral is
also grounded, the zero-sequence current has another path available, and the
magnitude of zero-sequence current carried by LV, HV and tertiary windings
depends on the relative impedances of the parallel paths (Z0T in parallel with
(Z0HS+Z0H) in figure 6.3). Hence, with the HV neutral also grounded, the forces on
the tertiary winding are reduced.
As seen in Chapter 3, the stabilizing unloaded tertiary windings are provided to
reduce the third harmonic component of flux and voltage by providing a path for
third harmonic magnetizing currents and to stabilize the neutral by virtue of
reduction in the zero-sequence impedance. For three-phase three-limb
transformers of smaller rating with star/star connected windings having grounded
neutrals, the tertiary stabilizing winding may not be provided. This is because the
reluctance offered to the zero-sequence flux is high, which makes the zerosequence impedance low and an appreciable unbalanced load can be taken by
three-phase three-limb transformers with star/star connected windings. Also, as
shown in Appendix A, for such transformers the omission of stabilizing winding
does not reduce the fault current drastically, and it should get detected by the
protection circuitry. The increase in zero-sequence impedance due to its omission
is not significant; the only major difference is the increase in HV neutral current,
which should be taken into account while designing the protection system. The
removal of tertiary winding in three-phase three-limb transformers with both HV
and LV neutrals grounded, eliminates the weakest link from the short circuit
design considerations and reduces the ground fault current to some extent. This
results in reduction of the short circuit stresses experienced by the transformers
and associated equipment. Hence, as explained in Section 3.8, the provision of
stabilizing winding in three-phase three-limb transformers should be critically
reviewed if permitted by the considerations of harmonic characteristics and
protection requirements.
The generator step-up transformers are generally subjected to short circuit
stresses lower than the interconnecting autotransformers. The higher generator
impedance in series with the transformer impedance reduces the fault current
magnitude for faults on the HV side of the generator transformer. There is a low
probability of faults on its LV side since the bus-bars of each phase are usually
enclosed in a metal enclosure (bus-duct). But, since generator transformers are the
most critical transformers in the whole network, it is desirable to have a higher
safety factor for them. Also, the out-of-phase synchronization in generator
transformers can result into currents comparable to three-phase short circuit

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

239

currents. It causes saturation of the core due to which an additional magnetizing
transient current gets superimposed on the fault current [5]. Considerable axial
short circuit forces are generated under these conditions [6].
The nature of short circuit currents can be highly asymmetrical like inrush
currents. A short circuit current has the maximum value when the short circuit is
performed at zero voltage instant. The asymmetrical short circuit current has two
components: a unidirectional component decreasing exponentially with time and
an alternating steady-state symmetrical component at fundamental frequency. The
rate of decay of the exponential component is decided by X/R ratio of the
transformer. The IEC 60076–5 (second edition: 2000–07) for power transformers
specifies an asymmetry factor corresponding to switching at the zero voltage
instant (the worst condition of switching). For the condition X/R>14, an
asymmetrical factor of 1.8 is specified for transformers upto 100 MVA rating,
whereas it is 1.9 for transformers above 100 MVA rating. Hence, the peak value of
asymmetrical short circuit current can be taken as

where Isym is the r.m.s. value of the symmetrical three-phase short circuit current.
The IEEE Standard C57.12.00–2000 also specifies the asymmetrical factors for
various X/R ratios, the maximum being 2 for the X/R ratio of 1000.

6.2 Thermal Capability at Short Circuit
A large current flowing in transformer windings at the time of a short circuit
results in temperature rise in them. Because of the fact that the duration of short
circuit is usually very short, the temperature rise is not appreciable to cause any
damage to the transformer. The IEC publication gives the following formulae for
the highest average temperature attained by the winding after a short circuit,

(6.17)

(6.18)
where θ0 is initial temperature in °C
J is current density in A/mm2 during the short circuit based on the r.m.s.
value of symmetrical short circuit current
t is duration of the short circuit in seconds

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

240

Chapter 6

While arriving at these expressions, an assumption is made that the entire heat
developed during the short circuit is retained in the winding itself raising its
temperature. This assumption is justified because the thermal time constant of a
winding in oil-immersed transformers is very high as compared to the duration of
the short circuit, which allows us to neglect the heat flow from windings to the
surrounding oil. The maximum allowed temperature for oil-immersed
transformers with the insulation system temperature of 105°C (thermal class A) is
250°C for a copper conductor whereas the same is 200°C for an aluminum
conductor. Let us calculate the temperature attained by a winding with the rated
current density of 3.5 A/mm2. If the transformer short circuit impedance is 10%,
the current density under short circuit will be 35 A/mm2 (corresponding to the
symmetrical short circuit current). Assuming the initial winding temperature as
105°C (worst case condition), the highest temperature attained by the winding
made of copper conductor at the end of the short circuit lasting for 2 seconds
(worst case duration) is about 121°C, which is much below the limit of 250°C.
Hence, the thermal withstand capability of a transformer under the short circuit
conditions is usually not a serious design issue.

6.3 Short Circuit Forces
The basic equation for the calculation of electromagnetic forces is
F=L I×B

(6.19)

where B is leakage flux density vector, I is current vector and L is winding length.
If the analysis of forces is done in two dimensions with the current density in the z
direction, the leakage flux density at any point can be resolved into two
components, viz. one in the radial direction (Bx) and other in the axial direction
(By). Therefore, there is radial force in the x direction due to the axial leakage flux
density and axial force in the y direction due to the radial leakage flux density, as
shown in figure 6.4.

Figure 6.4 Radial and axial forces

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

241

The directions of forces are readily apparent from the Fleming’s left hand rule
also, which says that when the middle finger is in the direction of current and the
second finger in the direction of field, the thumb points in the direction of force
(all these three fingers being perpendicular to each other).
We have seen in Chapter 3 that the leakage field can be expressed in terms of
the winding current. Hence, forces experienced by a winding are proportional to
the square of the short circuit current, and are unidirectional and pulsating in
nature. With the short circuit current having a steady state alternating component
at fundamental frequency and an exponentially decaying component, the force
has four components: two alternating components (one at fundamental frequency
decreasing with time and other at double the fundamental frequency with a
constant but smaller value) and two unidirectional components (one constant
component and other decreasing with time). The typical waveforms of the short
circuit current and force are shown in figure 6.5. Thus, with a fully offset current
the fundamental frequency component of the force is dominant during the initial
cycles as seen from the figure.

Figure 6.5 Typical waveforms of short circuit current and force

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

242

Chapter 6

As described earlier, the short circuit forces are resolved into the radial and
axial components simplifying the calculations. The approach of resolving them
into the two components is valid since the radial and axial forces lead to the
different kinds of stresses and modes of failures. There are number of methods
reported in the literature for the calculation of forces in transformers. Once the
leakage field is accurately calculated, the forces can be easily determined using
equation 6.19. Over the years, the short circuit forces have been studied from a
static consideration, that is to say that the forces are produced by a steady current.
The methods for the calculation of static forces are well documented in 1979 by a
CIGRE working group [7], The static forces can be calculated by any one of the
following established methods, viz. Roth’s method, Rabin’s method, the method
of images and finite element method. Some of the analytical and numerical
methods for the leakage field calculations are described in Chapter 3. The
withstand is checked for the first peak of the short circuit current (with appropriate
asymmetry factor as explained in Section 6.1).
A transformer is a highly asymmetrical 3-D electromagnetic device. Under a
three-phase short circuit, there is heavy concentration of field in the core window
and most of the failures of core-type transformers occur in the window region. In
three-phase transformers, the leakage fields of adjacent limbs affect each other.
The windings on the central limb are usually subjected to higher forces. There is a
considerable variation of force along the winding circumference. Although,
within the window the two-dimensional formulations are sufficiently accurate, the
three-dimensional numerical methods may have to be used for accurate estimation
of forces in the regions outside the core window [8].

6.3.1 Radial forces
The radial forces produced by the axial leakage field act outwards on the outer
winding tending to stretch the winding conductor, producing a tensile stress (also
called as hoop stress); whereas the inner winding experiences radial forces acting
inwards tending to collapse or crush it, producing a compressive stress. The
leakage field pattern of figure 6.4 indicates the fringing of the leakage field at the
ends of the windings due to which the axial component of the field reduces
resulting into smaller radial forces in these regions. For deriving a simple formula
for the radial force in a winding, the fringing of the field is neglected; the
approximation is justified because the maximum value of the radial force is
important which occurs in the major middle portion of the winding.
Let us consider an outer winding, which is subjected to hoop stresses. The
value of the leakage field increases from zero at the outside diameter to a
maximum at the inside diameter (at the gap between the two windings). The peak
value of flux density in the gap is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

243

(6.20)

where NI is the r.m.s. value of winding ampere-turns and Hw is winding height in
meters. The whole winding is in the average value of flux density of half the gap
value. The total radial force acting on the winding having a mean diameter of Dm
(in meters) can be calculated by equation 6.19 as

(6.21)

For the outer winding, the conductors close to gap (at the inside diameter)
experience higher forces as compared to those near the outside diameter (force
reduces linearly from a maximum value at the gap to zero at the outside diameter).
The force can be considered to be transferred from conductors with high load
(force) to those with low load if the conductors are wound tightly [9]. Hence,
averaging of the force value over the radial depth of the winding as done in the
above equation is justified since the winding conductors share the load almost
uniformly. If the curvature is taken into account by the process of integration
across the winding radial depth as done in Section 3.1.1 of Chapter 3, the mean
diameter of the winding in the above equation should be replaced by its inside
diameter plus two-thirds of the radial depth.
The average hoop stress for the outer winding is calculated as for a cylindrical
boiler shell shown in figure 6.6. The transverse force F acting on two halves of the
winding is equivalent to pressure on the diameter [10]; hence it will be given by
equation 6.21 with πDm replaced by Dm. If the cross-sectional area of turn is At (in
m2), the average hoop stress in the winding is

Figure 6.6 Hoop stress calculation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

244

Chapter 6

(6.22)

Let Ir be the rated r.m.s. current and Zpu be the per-unit impedance of a transformer.
Under the short circuit condition, the r.m.s. value of current in the winding is equal
to (Ir/Zpu). To take into account the asymmetry, this current value is multiplied by
the asymmetry factor k. If we denote copper loss per phase by PR, the expression
for σavg under the short circuit condition is

(6.23)
Substituting the values of µ0(=4π×10 -7) and ρ (resistivity of copper at 75°
=0.0211×10-6) we finally get
(6.24)
or
(6.25)
where PR is in watts and Hw in meters. It is to be noted that the term PR is only the
DC I2R loss (without having any component of stray loss) of the winding per
phase at 75°C. Hence, with very little and basic information of the design, the
average value of hoop stress can be easily calculated. If an aluminum conductor is
used, the numerical constant in the above equation will reduce according to the
ratio of the resistivity of copper to aluminum giving,

(6.26)
As mentioned earlier, the above value of average stress can be assumed to be
applicable for an entire tightly wound disk winding without much error. This is
because of the fact that although the stress is higher for the inner conductors of the
outer winding, these conductors cannot elongate without stressing the outer
conductors. This results in a near uniform hoop stress distribution over the entire
winding. In layer/helical windings having two or more layers, the layers do not
firmly support each other and there is no transfer of load between them. Hence,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

245

the hoop stress is highest for the innermost layer and it decreases towards the outer
layers. For a double-layer winding, the average stress in the layer near the gap is
1.5 times higher than the average stress for the two layers considered together.
Generalizing, if there are L layers, the average stress in kth layer (from gap) is [2((2k-1)/L)] times the average stress of all the layers considered together. Thus, the
design of outer multi-layer winding subjected to a hoop stress requires special
considerations.
For an inner winding subjected to radial forces acting inwards, the average
stress can be calculated by the same formulae as above for the outer winding.
However, since the inner winding can either fail by collapsing or due to bending
between the supports, the compressive stresses of the inner winding are not the
simple equivalents of the hoop stresses of the outer winding. Thus, the inner
winding design considerations are quite different, and these aspects along with the
failure modes are discussed in Section 6.5.
6.3.2 Axial forces
For an uniform ampere-turn distribution in windings with equal heights (ideal
conditions), the axial forces due to the radial leakage field at the winding ends are
directed towards the winding center as shown in figure 6.4. Although, there is
higher local force per unit length at the winding ends, the cumulative compressive
force is maximum at the center of windings (see figure 6.7). Thus, both the inner
and outer windings experience compressive forces with no end thrust on the
clamping structures (under ideal conditions). For an asymmetry factor of 1.8, the
total axial compressive force acting on the inner and outer windings taken together
is given by the following expression [11]:
(6.27)

Figure 6.7 Axial force distribution

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

246

Chapter 6

where S is rated power per limb in kVA, Hw is winding height in meters, Zpu is perunit impedance, and f is frequency in Hz. The inner winding being closer to the
limb, by virtue of higher radial flux, experiences higher compressive force as
compared to the outer winding. In the absence of detailed analysis, it can be
assumed that 25 to 33% of force is taken by the outer winding, and the remaining
75 to 67% is taken by the inner winding.
Calculation of axial forces in the windings due to the radial field in non-ideal
conditions is not straightforward. Assumptions, if made to simplify the
calculations, can lead to erroneous results for non-uniform windings. The
presence of tap breaks makes the calculations quite difficult. The methods
discussed in Chapter 3 should be used to calculate the radial field and the resulting
axial forces. The forces calculated at various points in the winding are added to
find the maximum compressive force in the winding. Once the total axial force for
each winding is calculated, the compressive stress in the supporting radial spacers
(blocks) can be calculated by dividing the compressive force by the total area of
the radial spacers. The stress should be less than a certain limit, which depends on
the material of the spacer. If the pre-stress (discussed in Section 6.7) applied is
more than the value of force, the pre-stress value should be considered while
calculating the stress on the radial spacers.
The reasons for a higher value of radial field and consequent axial forces are:
mismatch of ampere-turn distribution between LV and HV windings, tappings in
the winding, unaccounted shrinkage of insulation during drying and impregnation
processes, etc. When the windings are not placed symmetrically with respect to
the center-line as shown in figure 6.8, the resulting axial forces are in such a
direction that the asymmetry and the end thrusts on the clamping structures
increase further. It is well known that even a small axial displacement of windings
or misalignment of magnetic centers of windings can eventually cause enormous
axial forces leading to failure of transformers [12,13]. Hence, strict sizing/
dimension control is required during processing and assembling of windings so
that the windings get symmetrically placed.

Figure 6.8 Axial asymmetry

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

247

6.4 Dynamic Behavior Under Short Circuits
The transformer windings along with the supporting clamping structure form a
mechanical system having mass and elasticity. The applied electromagnetic forces
are oscillatory in nature and they act on the elastic system comprising of winding
conductors, insulation system and clamping structures. The forces are
dynamically transmitted to various parts of the transformer and they can be quite
different from the applied forces depending upon the relationship between
excitation frequencies and natural frequencies of the system. Thus, the dynamic
behavior of the system has to be analyzed to find out the stresses and
displacements produced by the short circuit forces. The dynamic analysis,
although quite complex, is certainly desirable which improves the understanding
of the whole phenomenon and helps designers to enhance the reliability of the
transformers under short circuit conditions. The dynamic behavior is associated
with time-dependence of the instantaneous short circuit current and the
corresponding force, and the displacement of the windings producing
instantaneous modifications of these forces. The inertia of conductors, frictional
forces and reactionary forces of the various resilient members of the system play
an important role in deciding the dynamic response.
In the radial direction, the elasticity of copper is large and the mass is small,
resulting into natural frequency much higher than 50/60 Hz and 100/ 120 Hz (the
fundamental frequency and twice the fundamental frequency of the excitation
force). Hence, there exists a very remote possibility of increase in displacements
by resonance effects under the action of radial forces. Therefore, these forces may
be considered as applied slowly and producing a maximum stress corresponding
to the first peak of an asymmetrical fault current [10]. In other words, the energy
stored by the displacement of windings subjected to radial forces is almost
entirely elastic and the stresses in the windings correspond closely with the
instantaneous values of the generated forces [14].
Contrary to the radial direction, the amount of insulation is quite significant
along the axial direction, which is easily compressible. With the axial forces
acting on the system consisting of the conductor and insulation, the natural
frequencies may come quite close to the excitation frequencies of the short circuit
forces. Such a resonant condition leads to large displacements and eventual failure
of transformers. Hence, the dynamic analysis of mechanical system consisting of
windings and clamping structures is essential and has been investigated in detail
by many researchers.
The transformer windings, made up of large number of conductors separated
by insulating materials, can be represented by an elastic column with distributed
mass and spring parameters, restrained by end springs representing the insulation
between the windings and yokes. Since there is heavy insulation at the winding
ends, these springs are usually assumed as mass-less. When a force is applied to an
elastic structure, the displacement and stress depend not only on the magnitude of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

248

Chapter 6

force and its variation with time, but also on the natural frequencies of the
structure.
The methods for calculating dynamic response are quite complex. They have to
take into account the boundary conditions, viz. degree of pre-stress, stiffness of
clamping structure and the proximity of tank/other windings. It should also take
into account the effects of displacement of conductors. The method reported in
[15] replaces a model of ordinary linear differential equations representing the
system by an approximate equivalent model of linear difference equations with a
constant time step-length. The non-linear insulation characteristics obtained from
the experimental data are used to solve the difference equations by a digital
computer. In [16,17], the dynamic load and displacement at any point in the
winding are calculated by using a generalized Fourier series of the normal modes
(standing wave approach). The analysis presented can be applied to an arbitrary
space distribution of electromagnetic forces with actual time variation of a fully
asymmetric short circuit current taken into account. The dynamic forces are
reported to have completely different magnitudes and waveshapes as compared to
the applied electromagnetic forces.
A rigorous analytical solution is possible when linear insulation characteristics
are assumed. The insulation of a transformer has non-linear insulation
characteristics. The dynamic properties of pressboard are highly non-linear and
considerably different from the static characteristics. The dynamic stiffness and
damping characteristics can be experimentally determined [18,19]. The use of
static characteristics was reported to be acceptable [19], which leads to pessimistic
results as compared to that obtained by using the dynamic characteristics. It was
shown in [20] that the dynamic value of Young’s modulus can be derived from the
static characteristics. However, it is explained in [17] that this approximation may
not be valid for oil-impregnated insulation. Oil provides hydrodynamic mass
effect to the clamping parts subjected to short circuit forces, and it also
significantly influences the insulation stiffness characteristics. These complexities
and the non-linearity of the systems involved can be effectively taken into account
by numerical methods. A dynamic analysis is reported in [21] which accounts for
the difference in the electromagnetic forces inside and outside the core window. It
is shown that a winding displacement inside the window is distinctly different and
higher than that outside the window. A simplified model is proposed in [22]
whereby the physical aggregation of conductors and supports is considered as a
continuous elastic solid represented by a single partial differential equation.
Thus, a number of numerical methods are available for determining the
dynamic response of a transformer under short circuit conditions. The methods
have not been yet perfected due to the lack of precise knowledge of dynamic
characteristics of various materials used in transformers. The dynamic
calculations can certainly increase the theoretical knowledge of the whole
phenomenon, but it is difficult to ascertain the validity of the results obtained. On
the contrary, it is fairly easy to calculate the natural frequencies of windings and
check the absence of resonance. Hence, a more practical approach can be to check

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

249

the withstand for the worst possible peak value of an asymmetrical fault current
(static calculation as explained in Section 6.3). In addition, the natural frequencies
of windings should be calculated to check that they are far away from the power
frequency or twice the power frequency. If the natural frequencies are close to
either 50 or 100 Hz (60 or 120 Hz), these can be altered (to avoid resonance) by
using a different pre-stress value or by changing the modes of vibration by a
suitable sub-division of windings. Hence, the well-established static calculations
along with the determination of natural frequencies could form a basis of short
circuit strength calculations [23,24] until the dynamic analysis is perfected and
standardized.
In a typical core type power transformer, windings are commonly clamped
between top and bottom clamping plates (rings) of insulating material. The
construction of the winding is quite complicated consisting of many different
materials like kraft paper, pre-compressed board, copper/aluminum conductor,
densified wood, etc. The winding consists of many disks and insulation spacers.
Thus, the winding is a combination of spacers, conductors and pre-compressed
boards. Strictly speaking, the winding is having multiple degrees of freedom. The
winding is considered as a distributed mass system in the analysis. The winding
stiffness is almost entirely governed by the insulation only. The top and bottom
end insulations are considered as mass-less linear springs. The winding can be
represented by an elastic column restrained between the two end springs as shown
in figure 6.9.
The equation of motion [16,21] is given by
(6.28)
where y(x, t) is the displacement (from a rest position) of any point at a vertical
distance x, m is mass of winding per unit length, c is damping factor per unit
length, k is stiffness per unit length, and F is applied electromagnetic force per unit
length.

Figure 6.9 Representation of winding [16]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

250

Chapter 6

The expression for natural frequency, ωn (in rad/sec) can be derived from
equation 6.28 with the boundary conditions that the displacement and velocity at
any position x are zero at t=0, and the net force acting at positions x=0 (winding
bottom) and x=L (winding top) is zero. The expression is
(6.29)
where λn is eigen value corresponding to nth natural frequency, M (=mL) is total
mass of winding, L is length (height) of winding, and K is winding stiffness (=k/
L). The winding stiffness per unit length is given by
(6.30)
where A is area of insulation, Eeq is equivalent Young’s modulus of winding, and
Leq is equivalent length of winding. Thus, the natural frequency of a winding is a
function of its mass, equivalent height, cross sectional area and modulus of
elasticity. The conductor material (copper) is too stiff to get compressed
appreciably by the axial force. Hence, all the winding compression is due to those
fractions of its height occupied by the paper and press-board insulation. The
equivalent Young’s modulus can therefore be calculated from [20]
(6.31)
where Eeq is modulus of elasticity of the combined paper and pressboard
insulation system, Ep is modulus of elasticity of paper, and Eb is modulus of
elasticity of pressboard. The terms Lp, Lb and Leq represent thickness of paper,
thickness of pressboard and total equivalent thickness of paper and pressboard
respectively.
The eigen values (λ) are calculated [16] from the equation

(6.32)

where K1 and K2 are the stiffness values of bottom and top end insulation
respectively. In equation 6.32, the only unknown is λ which can be found by an
iterative method. Subsequently, the values of natural frequencies can be calculated
from equation 6.29.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

251

The natural frequencies can be more accurately calculated by numerical
methods such as FEM analysis [24], If any of the calculated natural frequencies is
close to the exciting frequencies, they can be altered by making suitable changes
in the winding configuration and/or pre-stress value.

6.5 Failure Modes Due to Radial Forces
The failure modes of windings are quite different for inward and outward radial
forces. Winding conductors subjected to outward forces experience the tensile
(hoop) stresses. The compressive stresses are developed in conductors of a
winding subjected to the inward forces. In concentric windings, the strength of
outer windings subjected to the outward forces depends on the tensile strength of
the conductor; on the contrary the strength of inner windings subjected to the
inward forces depends on the support structure provided. The radial collapse of
the inner windings is common, whereas the outward bursting of the outer
windings usually does not take place.
6.5.1 Winding subjected to tensile stresses
If a winding is tightly wound, the conductors in the radial direction in a disk
winding or in any layer of a multi-layer winding can be assumed to have a uniform
tensile stress. Since most of the space in the radial direction is occupied with
copper (except for the small paper covering on the conductors), the ratio of
stiffness to mass is high. As mentioned earlier, the natural frequency is much
higher than the exciting frequencies, and hence chances of resonance are remote.
Under a stretched condition, if the stress exceeds the yield strength of the
conductor, a failure occurs. The conductor insulation may get damaged or there
could be local bulging of the winding. The conductor may even break due to
improper joints. The chances of failure of windings subjected to the tensile hoop
stresses are unlikely if a conductor with a certain minimum 0.2% proof strength is
used. The 0.2% proof stress can be defined as that stress value which produces a
permanent strain of 0.2% (2 mm in 1000 mm) as shown in figure 6.10. One of the
common ways to increase the strength is the use of work-hardened conductor; the
hardness should not be very high since there could be difficulty in winding
operation with such a hard conductor. A lower value of current density is also used
to improve the withstand characteristics.
6.5.2 Windings subjected to compressive stresses
Conductors of inner windings, which are subjected to the radial compressive
load, may fail due to bending between supports or buckling. The former case is
applicable when the inner winding is firmly supported by the axially placed
supporting spacers (strips), and the supporting structure as a whole has higher
stiffness than conductors (e.g., if the spacers are supported by the core
structure).

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

252

Chapter 6

Figure 6.10 0.2% Proof stress

In that case, the conductors can bend between the supports all along the
circumference as shown in figure 6.11 (a) if the stress exceeds the elastic limit of
the conductor material. This form of buckling is termed as forced buckling [25,
discussion of 26], which also occurs when the winding cylinder has a significant
stiffness as compared to the winding conductors (i.e., when thick cylinders of a
stiff material are used).
The latter case of buckling, termed as free buckling, is essentially an
unsupported buckling mode, in which the span of the conductor buckle bears no
relation to the span of axial supporting spacers as shown in figure 6.11 (b). This
kind of failure occurs mostly with thin winding cylinders, where conductor has
higher stiffness as compared to that of inner cylinders and/or the cylinders (and
the axial spacers) are not firmly supported from inside. The conductors bulge
inwards as well as outwards at one or more locations along the circumference.
There are many factors which may lead to the buckling phenomenon, viz. winding
looseness, inferior material characteristics, eccentricities in windings, lower
stiffness of supporting structures as compared to the conductor, etc.

Figure 6.11 Buckling phenomena

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

253

The buckling can be viewed as a sequential chain of failures, initiated at the
outermost conductor of the inner winding and moving towards the innermost
conductor facing the core. The number of winding supports should be adequate
for giving the necessary strength to the winding against the radial forces. When
the supporting structures are in direct contact with the core, a winding can be
taken as very rigidly supported. On the contrary, if there is no direct contact (fully
or partly) with the core, the winding is only supported by the insulating cylinder
made of mostly the pressboard material thereby reducing the effective stiffness of
the support structure and increasing the chances of failure. The supports provided
are effective only when the support structure as a whole is in firm contact with the
core.
A winding conductor subjected to the inward radial forces is usually modeled
as a circular loop under a uniformly distributed radial load. The critical load per
unit length of the winding conductor is given by [27]
(6.33)
where E is modulus of elasticity of conductor material, Ns is total number of
axially placed supports, w is width of conductor, t is thickness of conductor and
Dm is mean diameter of winding. The compressive stress on the inner winding
conductor is given as [10]
(6.34)
where A is area of conductor (=w t). Substituting the value of fr from equation 6.33
we get

(6.35)
For Ns>>1, the expression for the minimum number of supports to be provided is
(6.36)
The term σavg is the average value of the compressive stress (in an entire disk
winding or in a layer of a multi-layer winding) calculated as per Section 6.3.1. It
can be observed that the higher the conductor thickness, the lower the number of
required supports will be. Adoption of higher slenderness ratio (t Ns/Dm) allows
higher critical radial compressive stresses [27]. For a winding with a low mean
diameter, there is a limit up to which the conductor thickness can be increased (it

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

254

Chapter 6

is difficult to wind a thick conductor on a small winding diameter). Similarly, for
a given winding diameter, there is a limit on the number of axially placed
supports; the radially placed spacers (between disks) on these axially placed
spacers reduce the surface area available for the cooling purpose. To avoid this
problem, the intermediate axially placed spacers (between every two main
spacers) are used, which do not have the radial spacers placed on them.
A more elaborate and accurate analysis of buckling behavior has been reported
in the literature. The dynamic analysis of the buckling behavior of inner windings
subjected to radial forces is reported in [13,26]. The FEM analysis is used in [28]
to evaluate the radial buckling strength of windings.
The design of windings for withstanding the tensile stresses is relatively easy
as compared to the compressive stresses. This is because for the tensile stresses,
the permissible stress depends on the yield strength of the conductor material.
There are fewer ambiguities, once the calculated maximum stress (whose
calculation is also usually straightforward) is kept below the yield stress. The
design criteria for determining the withstand of the inner windings subjected to
the compressive stresses are a bit complicated and may vary for different
manufacturers. After the drying and oil-impregnation processes, the insulating
components may shrink considerably. Hence, the lowering clearances and
tolerances provided for the insulating components have to be properly decided
based on the manufacturing practices and variations in dimensions of the
insulating materials observed at various stages of manufacturing. If the inner
winding is not assembled on the core-limb in tight-fit condition or if there is
looseness, then the wedging of insulating components is necessary. If the total
integrity of the support structure is ensured in this manner, the inner winding can
be said to be supported from the inside and the number of supports calculated by
equation 6.36 will be adequate to prevent the buckling. Some manufacturers [9]
completely ignore the strength provided by the inner supporting structures and
design the windings to be completely self-supporting. The current density used
therefore has to be lower with the result that the material content and cost of the
transformer increases. Nevertheless, the reliability of the transformer is enhanced
and the extra material put can be easily justified for large transformers. It is
reported (discussion of [26]) based on the model tests that the insertion of tightfitting insulation spacers between the core and innermost insulating cylinder may
not be an effective solution for increasing the strength because the clearances
between the elements of the structure are larger than the disk displacements prior
to the buckling. Thus, the concept of completely self-supporting design seems to
be a better option.

6.6 Failure Modes Due to Axial Forces
There are various types of failures under the action of axial compressive forces. If
a layer winding is not wound tightly, some conductors may just axially pass over

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

255

the adjacent conductors, which may damage the conductor insulation leading
eventually into a turn-to-turn fault. In another mode of failure, if a winding is set
into vibration under the action of axial forces, the conductor insulation may get
damaged due to a relative movement between the winding and axially placed
insulation spacers.
High axial end thrusts could lead to deformations of the end clamping
structures and windings. The end clamping structures play the most important role
in resisting axial forces during short circuits. They have to maintain an effective
pressure on the windings, applied usually on the clamping ring made of stiff
insulating material (pre-compressed board or densified wood). The type of
insulation material used for the clamping ring depends on the dielectric stress in
the end insulation region of windings. The densified wood material is used for
lower stresses and pre-compressed board, being a better grade dielectrically, is
used for higher stresses and for complying stringent partial discharge
requirements. When a clamping ring made of an insulating material is reinforced
by the fiberglass material, an extra strength is provided. Some manufacturers use
clamping rings made of steel material. The thickness of metallic clamping rings is
smaller than that made from the insulating material. The metallic ring has to be
properly grounded with a cut so that it does not form a short-circuited turn around
the limb. The sharp edges of the metallic ring should be rounded off and covered
with a suitable insulation.
In addition to above types of failures due to the axial forces, there are two
principal types of failures, viz. bending between radial spacers and tilting.
6.6.1 Bending between radial spacers
Under the action of axial forces, the winding conductor can bend between the
radially placed insulation spacers as shown in figure 6.12. The conductor bending
can result into a damage of its insulation. The maximum stress in the conductor
due to bending occurs at the corners of the radial spacers and is given by
(6.37)

Figure 6.12 Bending between radial spacers

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

256

Chapter 6

where,
FAL

is maximum axial bending load in kg/cm. It corresponds to the most
highly stressed disk in a disk winding or turn in a helical winding
(layer winding with radial spacers). The maximum axial load may
usually lie in the region of non-uniform ampere-turn distribution (e.g.,
tap zone). The maximum axial load, calculated accurately by a method
such as FEM, divided by the mean turn length (πDm) gives the value of
FAL, where Dm is mean diameter of winding in cm.

S

is span between two radial spacers in cm

y

NS is number of radial spacers.
is maximum distance from neutral axis for conductor in cm (i.e., half
of conductor axial width: w/2).

I0

is moment of inertia of disk or turn

n being number of

conductors in radial direction, and t is conductor thickness in cm.
The maximum stress in the conductor calculated by the above formula should be
less than the limiting value for the type of conductor used (about 1200 kg/cm2 less
than the lim for soft copper).
6.6.2 Tilting under an axial load
The failure due to tilting under the action of axial compressive forces is one of the
principal modes of failures in large power transformers. When these forces are
more than a certain limit, a failure can occur due to tilting of conductors in a
zigzag fashion as shown in figure 6.13 for a disk winding. In this mode of failure,
there is turning of cross section of conductors around the perpendicular axis of
symmetry. There are two kinds of forces that resist the tilting of the conductors.
The first one is due to the conductor material, which resists being twisted. The
second resisting force is the friction force (due to corners of conductors); during
tilting the conductors at both ends must bite into the material of the radial spacer,
producing a couple at the conductor ends which resists tilting. The two resisting
forces are usually considered separately to arrive at the critical stress and load,
causing the failure.
The critical load and critical stress for a disk winding, if the resistance offered
by the conductor material alone to twisting is considered, are [10]:
(6.38)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

257

Figure 6.13 Conductor tilting in a disk winding

(6.39)

where R is mean radius of winding, w is conductor width (height in axial
direction), t is conductor radial thickness, N is number of winding turns, and E is
modulus of elasticity of conductor. For this case, rounded ends are assumed for
the conductor so that the frictional resistance is absent. The tilting strength
decreases inversely as the square of winding radius, suggesting that the large
windings should be carefully designed.
If the conductor has sharp ends, the frictional force resists tilting. The critical
load against the friction is [10]
(6.40)
where Nb is number of radial spacers (blocks), b is width of spacers and c is
constant which depends on spacer material. Actually, due to the conductor corner
radius, the contribution to tilting resistance (due to friction) reduces and this
reduction should be considered suitably along with equation 6.40. The critical
strength of a helical winding (a layer winding with radial spacers) is higher than a
layer winding (which is without radial spacers) because of the additional strength
offered by the spacers.
The total critical load Fcr is the addition of axial strengths against twisting and
friction,
(6.41)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

258

Chapter 6

Figure 6.14 Half-tilting mode in a layer winding [29]

Analysis of a layer winding under a tilting load is given in [29]. It is reported
that this winding can fail in the zigzag pattern on one side only as shown in figure
6.14 (termed as the half-tilting failure mode). It is also reported in the same paper
that a disk winding can also fail in the half-tilting mode for which the winding
strength is about 10% less than the corresponding full tilting strength. The
mechanical resonance frequencies in the tilting mode of failure are usually much
higher than the excitation frequencies, and therefore there is no chance of
resonance in this mode. The conductor dimensions have a decisive role in the
tilting strength. The twisting strength increases with the conductor width in the
square proportion as per equation 6.39. Equation 6.41 indicates that the risk of
tilting increases for thin conductors.
When a continuously transposed cable (CTC) conductor is used, although
there are two axially placed rows of conductors in one common paper covering
(see figure 4.9), it cannot be assumed that the effective tilting strength is higher.
The tilting strength of the CTC conductor without epoxy bonding is analyzed for
a layer winding in [30]. Two possible modes of failures are described. The first
type of failure (termed as cable-wise tilting), in which two adjacent cables tilt
against each other, is shown in figure 6.15 (a). If the inter-strand friction is higher,
the winding is forced to tilt in pairs of strands in the CTC conductor. The critical
stress for this mode of failure, with the consideration of conductor resistance
alone, is
(6.42)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

259

Figure 6.15 Tilting in layer winding with CTC conductor

where w1 is width of individual strand in the CTC conductor. Comparison of
equations 6.39 and 6.42 tells that for the same strand dimensions, the CTC
conductor has four times greater tilting strength; the result is obvious because the
effective width of its conductor is doubled increasing the strength by four times.
This increase in strength is valid only when the two axially placed strands in the
CTC conductor can be considered to act together under the tilting load.
In the second mode of failure (termed as strand-wise tilting), two axially placed
strands in the CTC conductor tilt against each other as shown in figure 6.15 (b).
The critical tilting load in this mode may be lower, reducing the effective overall
tilting strength. This is because the lower of the cable-wise and strand-wise
strengths triggers the axial instability. It is shown in [30] that while the critical
stress in the cable-wise tilting is independent of number of strands in the cable (n),
the critical stress in the strand-wise tilting is inversely proportional to n. As the
number of strands in the CTC conductor increases, the critical load limit in the
strand-wise tilting becomes lower than the cable-wise tilting. Hence, with the
increase in number of strands in the CTC conductor, the mode of failure shifts
from the cable-wise tilting to the strand-wise tilting.
The use of epoxy-bonded CTC conductor is quite common in which the epoxy
coating effectively bonds the strands increasing the resistance against the strandwise tilting. Each strand in the epoxy-bonded CTC conductor has, in addition to
an enamel coating, a coat of thermosetting epoxy resin. The curing of this resin
occurs at around 120°C during the processing of windings. After curing, the
epoxy-bonded CTC conductor consisting of many strands can be considered as
one conductor with an equivalent cross section for the mechanical strength
consideration. Thus, the possibility of strand-wise tilting is eliminated, greatly
increasing the strength of the CTC conductor against the tilting load. The epoxybonded CTC conductor not only reduces the winding eddy losses (as explained in
Chapter 4) but it also significantly improves the short circuit withstand
characteristics.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

260

Chapter 6

6.7 Effect of Pre-Stress
The clamping pressure applied on the windings after the completion of corewinding assembly is called as pre-stress. It has a significant impact on the
response of windings during short circuits. It increases the stiffness of windings
thereby increasing their mechanical natural frequencies. The relationship between
the natural frequency and pre-stress is highly non-linear [31]. The pre-stress
reduces oscillatory forces acting on the insulation. The winding displacements
also decrease with the increase in the pre-stress value. It should be noted that the
value of pre-stress should be judiciously chosen depending upon the
characteristics of core-winding assembly [17,32,33]. The chosen value of prestress must get maintained during the entire life of a transformer. This means that
the insulation stability should be fully realized during the processing of windings
during manufacturing. If the natural frequency without pre-stress is higher than
the excitation frequencies, a higher pre-stress value will significantly reduce the
oscillatory forces. Contrary to this, if the natural frequency without pre-stress is
lower than the excitation frequencies, a certain value of pre-stress will bring the
natural frequency closer to the excitation frequencies leading to an increase in the
oscillatory forces. The natural frequency is reported to vary as some function of
square root of the ratio of pre-stress to maximum value of peak electromagnetic
stress in the winding [17].
The natural frequency of a winding may change during the short circuit period
due to changes in the insulation characteristics and ratio of pre-stress to total
stress. Thus, the natural frequency measured from the free response may be
different after the short circuit as compared to that before the short circuit. Also,
during the short circuit the winding, which may be in resonance at some time
experiencing a higher stress, may get detuned from the resonance due to change in
insulation characteristics at some other instant.

6.8 Short Circuit Test
The short circuit test can be performed by one of the two techniques, viz. pre-set
short circuit and post-set short circuit. In the pre-set short circuit test, a previously
short-circuited transformer (i.e., with a short-circuited secondary winding) is
energized from its primary side. If the secondary winding is the inner winding, the
limb flux is quite low as explained in Section 5.12.2 (figure 5.38) resulting in an
insignificant transient inrush current. Hence, the method will work quite well. If
the primary is the inner winding, there is substantial flux density in the limb and
hence the inrush current gets superimposed on the short circuit current. Since the
inrush current flows through the primary winding only, it creates a significant
ampere-turn unbalance between the primary and secondary windings resulting in
high short circuit forces. Depending upon the instant of closing and the core
residual flux, the magnitude of the inrush current varies (as explained in Chapter

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

261

2). In order to reduce inrush current and its effects during the test, the core can be
deliberately pre-magnetized with the opposite polarity [34].
In the post-set short circuit test method, in which the transformer is in the
energized condition, the secondary winding is short-circuited. Naturally, this
method is preferred as there are no inrush currents and the related problems, and
also due to the fact that it represents the actual fault conditions at site. However,
the disadvantage of this method is that the short circuit capacity of test stations has
to be much higher [9,35] than the first method to maintain the rated voltage across
the transformer terminals (by overcoming the voltage drop across the series
impedance between the source and transformer) and establish the required value
of short circuit current. If the source impedance is not negligible as compared to
the transformer impedance, a higher voltage needs to be applied, subject to a limit
of 1.15 p.u. (on no-load source voltage) as per IEC standard 60076–5 (second
edition: 2000–07). Thus, the required short circuit capacity of the test stations
increases. The capacity of the test stations should be at least 9 times the short
circuit power of the transformer for a 15% over-excitation condition [35]. The test
stations may not have such capability, and hence short circuit tests on large
transformers are usually carried out by the pre-set method.
After the short circuit test, the performance is considered satisfactory if the
following conditions are met as per the IEC standard:
-

results of short circuit tests and measurements performed during tests do not
indicate any condition of a fault
routine tests including dielectric tests, repeated after the short circuit test, are
successful
out-of-tank inspection does not indicate any displacement/deformation of the
active part and/or support structures
there are no traces of internal electrical discharges
change in impedance is not more than 2% for any phase after the test for
transformers up to 100 MVA. The corresponding value is 1% for transformers
above 100 MVA. The more stringent requirement for large transformers is in
line with the experience that the variation in impedance more than 1% in large
power transformers indicates a large deformation in one or more windings,
whereas the change in impedance between 0.5% to 1% indicates a
progressive movement of winding conductors [34].

To evaluate the test results, the most important and conclusive diagnostic tests
seem to be the impedance measurements and visual inspection [34], although
advanced techniques like FRA (frequency response analysis), vibration
measurements, dynamic oil pressure measurements, etc. are also used.

6.9 Effect of Inrush Current
As explained in Chapter 2, when a transformer is switched on, the magnitude of
inrush current depends on many factors, the predominant factors being the instant

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

262

Chapter 6

of switching and residual magnetism in the core. The inrush current can be as high
as six to eight times the rated current, and transformer users are always
apprehensive about the repeated switching of a transformer. The inrush transients
are more frequent than the short circuits and they last for few seconds as compared
to the short circuits which are usually cleared in tens of milliseconds. From the
point of mechanical forces, only the energized winding is subjected to the
mechanical stresses. The inrush currents are usually not taken very seriously from
the mechanical design considerations. The inner windings have a lower value of
air-core reactance. Therefore, a transformer switched from the inner winding
experiences a higher inrush current It is known that the layer/ helical windings are
quite vulnerable to short circuits. Hence, if a transformer is switched on a number
of times in a day from its inner layer/helical winding, forces generated due to the
inrush currents may weaken the winding over a period of time leading to a
winding looseness and subsequent failure. When the transformer is switched from
the outer HV winding having higher air-core reactance, the magnitude of the
inrush current and corresponding forces are lower.
Recent insulation failures in larger transformers, which were frequently
energized under no-load condition, have attracted attention of researchers. The
impact of inrush currents on mechanical stresses of windings has been
investigated in [36]. It is shown that the axial forces calculated with the
maximum possible inrush current are of the same order of magnitude as that
calculated with the short circuit currents, and hence the use of controlled
switching strategies is recommended. In another paper [37], the force patterns
under the short circuit and inrush conditions are compared and shown to be
quite different from each other.

6.10 Split-Winding Transformers
Split-winding transformers have the advantage that splitting secondary
windings into two parts obviates the need of having two double-winding
transformers. There is a considerable saving in instrumentation (on the HV side)
and space, since a transformer, with one HV winding and two LV windings,
substitutes two double-winding transformers of half the power rating. The
arrangement also results in a considerable reduction in the values of short circuit
currents in the two separately supplied circuits decreasing the required rating of
circuit breakers. The split-winding transformers are usually step-down
transformers in which the secondary winding is split into two equally rated
windings (half the primary rating). The two secondary windings are placed
axially with respect to each other in order to have equal impedances to the
primary winding. The primary winding is also split into two parts with centerline lead arrangement as shown in figure 6.16.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

263

Figure 6.16 Split-winding transformer

The split-winding arrangement requires special short circuit design
considerations. Consider the pre-set short circuit method, in which a voltage is
applied to HV winding with one of the LV windings, say LV2, short-circuited. The
flux density distribution is completely different in the lower and upper parts of the
core limb. The flux density in the upper part is very high requiring high
magnetizing inrush current for HV1 winding, whereas there is no demand for a
significant magnetizing current by HV2 winding since the flux density in the
bottom part of the limb is very low due to the short-circuited inner LV2 winding.
This phenomenon results into heavy distortion of fields in the core and windings.
There is a considerable amount of radial field due to an asymmetrical distribution
of ampere-turns resulting into excessive axial forces and end thrusts. The
phenomenon is analyzed in [35] by means of a non-linear magnetic model. It is
recommended to do two set-up tests with the opposite polarity to magnetize the
core in the reverse direction so that the inrush current is reduced to a harmless
value during the pre-set method. If the short circuit capacity of the test station is
high enough to allow the post-set method (which eliminates the inrush currents
and related problems), there is still one more characteristic of the split-winding
transformers which makes the short circuit test on them more severe than that on
the conventional two winding transformers. With LV2 winding short-circuited,
some current flows in HV1 winding not facing directly the short-circuited LV2
winding. The current in HV1 winding is small, in the range of 3 to 5% of that
flowing in HV2 winding [38] due to much higher impedance between HV1 and
LV2 windings, but it is sufficient to cause an ampere-turn unbalance along the
height of windings. The ampere-turns of HV2 winding are smaller than that of
LV2 winding, and corresponding to the ampere-turns of HV1 winding there are no
balancing ampere-turns in LV1 winding (since it is open-circuited). Hence, there
is a considerable distortion of the leakage field resulting into higher axial short

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

264

Chapter 6

circuit forces [39]. For the same value of short circuit current, the forces are higher
for the case in which only one of the LV windings is short-circuited as compared
to the case when both the LV windings are short-circuited. Thus, although the
split-winding configuration helps in limiting the rating of circuit breakers, it poses
problems for the short circuit withstand.

6.11 Short Circuit Withstand
The IEC 60076–5 (second edition: 2000–07) proposes that the ability to withstand
dynamic effects of short circuits should be demonstrated either by the short circuit
test or by calculations/design considerations. The latter method is used if there are
constraints of cost, time, logistics and test limitations [23]. In this method, the
manufacturers provide calculations, technological choices, design margins and
adequacy of manufacturing processes. They have to demonstrate the validity of
their dimensioning rules by reference to similar transformers having passed the
test or by reference to the tests on representative models. A comparison of stress
and strength values of the transformer with these other transformers/models
should be done. The guidelines for the identification of similar transformers are
given in the IEC standard. This method is a sort of comprehensive design review
with the involvement of users and may cover review of calculations of short circuit
currents and stresses for various types of faults, choice of particular type of
material used, safety margins and quality control of manufacturing processes. The
design review at different stages of design and manufacturing is a very important
step in ensuring the reliability of transformers under short circuits. In order to
improve the short circuit performance of transformers, the purchaser or his
representative should get involved in reviewing and assessing the quality of design
and manufacturing processes at few important stages during the execution of the
whole contract. There is a lot of scope for cooperation between the transformer
manufacturer and purchaser. Two major areas of cooperation are the improvement
in technical specifications and design review. In many cases, the users may have
confidence about the capability of manufacturers based on the design criteria
limits and results of short circuit tests obtained on model coils as well as full size
transformers over a period of time. A standardized calculation method for the
demonstration of the ability to withstand the dynamic effects of a short circuit is
under consideration in the IEC standard.
The short circuit test is the best way to ascertain the short circuit performance
of a transformer. This is because the transformer is a highly labour intensive
product and the short circuit performance may be greatly influenced by the quality
of manufacturing processes. The transformer consists of different kinds of
materials, whose responses to short circuit forces are quite different Two
transformers having an identical design may perform differently during the short
circuit test if the quality of manufacturing processes is not consistent. Weaknesses
in design and manufacturing processes get exposed when there is a failure during

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

265

the test. The short circuit test may disclose some intricate failure modes based on
which design and manufacturing processes can be improved. It should be
remembered that in addition to a detailed theoretical analysis with the help of
advanced computational techniques, it is very much essential to correlate the
results of calculation with the experimental data of short circuit tests on
transformers or their equivalent models. These tests give the most authentic
confirmation of the assumptions or estimates of the material properties, transfer of
forces, clearances, etc. used in the theoretical analysis.
There are a number of influencing factors which determine the short circuit
stresses and withstand. These factors along with the general guidelines and
precautions that can be taken at the specification, design and production stages of
transformers for improving the short circuit strength are described below.
6.11.1 System configuration and transformer specification [1]
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Limited extension of sub-transmission networks thereby reducing short
circuit levels in the system.
High impedance grounding of the neutral of distribution and subtransmission networks.
Specification of higher values of percentage impedances for critical
transformers.
Use of transformers instead of autotransformers, if possible, even if it results
in higher cost.
Neutral end tapping arrangement for transformers with on-load tap changer.
Specification of taps on more than one winding should be avoided.
Lower tapping range.
Removal of tertiary winding used for stabilizing purposes, from the
specification for three-phase three-limb transformers upto a certain rating.
Specification and use of the split-winding configuration should be avoided, if
possible.

The above recommendations have an impact on the power system protection and
performance; hence they should be adopted after a thorough study.
6.11.2 Design
1.
2.

3.

If the stabilizing tertiary winding is a must, its current density should be as
low as possible (massive and stiff winding).
For withstanding radial forces, the conductor dimensions can be chosen such
that the conductor can resist the compressive forces on its own, without
relying on the supporting structures.
Whenever the CTC conductor is required to be used to achieve lower winding
stray losses and for the ease of winding, it preferably should be epoxybonded. The epoxy-bonded CTC conductor greatly enhances the resistance

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

266

Chapter 6

of the winding against buckling and tilting because of the bonding effect
between strands due to the epoxy coating. The use of one CTC conductor,
instead of a number of parallel strip conductors, has the advantage that the
transpositions between parallel strands within the CTC conductor are made at
regular intervals along the conductor length by automatic machines, and no
manual transpositions are required to be done at the winding stage. Even for
very large rating transformers, in which there are a number of CTC
conductors in parallel (usually a maximum of three in the radial direction),
the number of transpositions required are quite less (n-1, n being the number
of parallel CTC conductors in the radial direction).
4. Windings can be made of high grade proof stress conductor material.
5. Use of lower current densities in windings for critical transformers.
6. Use of thicker insulating cylinders for supporting inner windings.
7. Adoption of higher slenderness ratio for the inner windings to increase the
compressive strength against the radial forces.
8. Estimation of natural frequencies of windings and ensuring that there is no
excited resonance.
9. Correct selection of winding arrangements to minimize short circuit forces.
10. It is usually preferable to have taps in a separate winding and not in the body
of main winding from the short circuit strength consideration. Further, the
turns should be so arranged in the separate tap winding that when one tap-step
is cut out of the circuit, the turns get uniformly removed all along the height of
the winding (e.g., interleaved tap winding in figure 7.15), minimizing
ampere-turn unbalance between windings along the height.
11. If the taps need to be provided in the body of main winding, their placement at
the winding end should be avoided. The short circuit forces are reduced when
the taps are put in the center instead of one end. The forces are further reduced
if they are put in two groups in the body and placed symmetrically around the
center-line of the winding. The relative comparison of short circuit forces for
various arrangements of tap positions is given in [10] using the residual
ampere-turn diagram. The ampere-turns of the untapped winding should be
reduced in the zone corresponding to the tapping zone of the tapped winding.
The balancing of ampere-turns between the two windings in this zone should
be done at the average tap position.
12. Understanding the service condition and installation environment from the
point of short circuit duty.
6.11.3 Manufacturing processes
1.
2.
3.

Proper alignment of axially placed spacers to give adequate support to the
inner windings.
Accurate positioning of axial and radial support structures.
Winding should be wound tightly on the axial spacers placed on the cylinder;

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

267

in which case a sufficiently thick cylinder can provide a significant support
to the winding for withstanding the forces that tend to buckle it.
4. Placement of tight-fitting wooden dowels on the core in close contact with the
insulating cylinders, and radially in line with the axial supports.
5. Before use, special storage conditions are required for the epoxy-bonded
CTC conductors as per the supplier’s instructions. Also, it is a good practice
to cut a sample of the CTC conductor used for the winding, process it along
with the winding, and then check its mechanical properties through a suitable
testing procedure [5].
6. Strictly controlled manufacturing processes for the windings.
7. When a double-layer winding is used to have an advantage of field
cancellation due to go and return conductors (which reduces the stray losses),
the forces under a short circuit are high both at the winding terminations and
also in the leads. Hence, in the case of a double-layer winding, adequate
precautions need to be taken for improving the short circuit withstand at the
lead take-off points in the windings and also at the terminations. For a singlelayer winding, one connection is made at the top and other at the bottom of
the winding resulting in the manageable value of short circuit forces. But in
this single-layer design, the route of high current leads from the bottom of
winding should be carefully designed to minimize the stray losses as they run
parallel to the tank and other structural components, and get terminated on the
tank cover at the top.
8. Purchase of materials from qualified suppliers with clear material
specifications and quality assurance procedures.
9. Use of high density pressboard for insulation components within windings,
and between windings and yokes.
10. Judicious selection of pre-stress value and achieve required winding heights
with no magnetic asymmetry between windings.
11. Use of clamping structures of adequate stiffness with appropriate fastening.
12. Adequate support and securing of leads at the winding ends.
13. Adequate fastening of connections to the tap-changer and bushings.
14. Use of fiberglass reinforced clamping rings, if required.
15. Use of winding cylinder made of fiberglass for inner windings.
16. Use of preshrunk and oil-impregnated spacers/special insulation components
(like angle rings within the winding).
17. Vapour phase drying of windings before the final assembly in specific cases
for a better dimensional control.
18. Burr-free edge rounding of spacers for eliminating the biting of the paper
insulation on the winding conductor.
19. Ensuring tightness of the conductors in the radial direction.
20. For better sizing, windings are individually processed (heating and vacuum
cycles) followed by an axial compression before the final assembly, which
minimizes the possibility of any looseness in the windings. The designed

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

268

Chapter 6
winding height should be obtained at the final assembly stage before
applying the final clamping pressure. This is achieved by inserting/
removing insulation spacers (blocks) so that the pre-determined pressure will
get uniformly applied to all the assembled windings. Some manufacturers use
the isostatic clamping process for each individual winding for better sizing,
in which a constant pressure is applied on the winding uniformly and
continuously throughout the drying process.

6.12 Calculation of Electrodynamic Force Between Parallel
Conductors
A current carrying straight conductor of length l, placed in a uniform magnetic
field of flux density B, experiences a mechanical force given by
F=Bil sinθ

(6.43)

where θ is the angle between the direction of the flux density vector and that of the
current (i) in the conductor. The direction of the force is given by the Fleming’s
left hand rule. Figure 6.17 (a) shows two stranded conductors (P and Q) of equal
length (l) carrying currents i1 and i2 respectively (in amperes) in the opposite
directions and placed d distance apart (in meters). As per the Fleming’s left hand
rule, there is a repulsive force between the conductors. If the currents are in the
same direction, then the force between the conductors is attractive in nature. The
force per unit length of the conductors is given by
(6.44)
This is the classical formula for an electrodynamic force between two current
carrying wires. It is applicable to thin circular conductors only and is valid when
the distance between conductors is considerably larger than their dimensions. The
conductors are also assumed to be rectilinear and infinitely long.

Figure 6.17 Force between parallel conductors

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

269

For rectangular conductors, an accurate force calculation is possible by
considering the conductor cross section as a superimposition of interacting line
current filaments. The force per unit length between parallel rectangular
conductors shown in figure 6.17 (b), for which l>>d, is
(6.45)
where ks, a function of

is shape factor that varies according to the

dimensions and spacing between the conductors. The value of ks for different
values of a, b and d can be obtained from the curves given in [40,41].
In transformers, rectangular conductors/flats are used between the windings
(lead exits) and terminations (on tank). These conductors have to be supported at
regular intervals to withstand the short circuit forces. Consider a rectangular
conductor subjected to an electromagnetic force acting uniformly on it. Let the
distance between two consecutive supports be S. The conductor structure,
subjected to the short circuit loads, acts as a beam supported at the both ends as
shown in figure 6.18. The maximum bending moment is
(6.46)

where f is the load (force) per unit length (to be calculated by equation 6.45).

Figure 6.18 Calculation of maximum unsupported span

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

270

Chapter 6

Now,
(6.47)
where

is moment of inertia,

is maximum distance from the neutral

axis for the conductor, and σ is stress in the conductor. By putting the values of M,
I and y in the equation 6.47 we get:
(6.48)
If σmax is the maximum allowable stress in the conductor in N/m2, substituting the
value of f from equation 6.45 for the same value of current (the peak value of an
asymmetrical current) flowing in the two parallel conductors, we get the
expression for the maximum allowable spacing between the consecutive supports
of the conductor:
(6.49)
Similarly, the maximum allowable spacing between the supports of a rectangular
conductor for any other support condition can be determined.
The analysis given above is applicable for a rectilinear conductor. For more
complex arrangements (e.g., bends in a conductor or two conductors in different
planes), the analytical formulation can be done [42] but it becomes more involved.
Now, using numerical techniques like FEM, any complex arrangement of
conductors can be easily analyzed for the calculations of forces.

6.13 Design of Clamping Structures
The clamping structures are provided in a transformer to prevent any movement of
windings due to the forces produced at the time of a short circuit. Therefore, the
clamping structures are designed such that they put the windings permanently
under a desired pressure. The clamping structures consist of clamping ring, flitch
plates and frames, as shown in figure 6.19.
Stresses in clamping ring:
For the clamping purpose, bolts are provided for maintaining a constant pressure
on windings; the required pressure is applied on the clamping ring by tightening
the bolts in small transformers. For large transformers, the pressure is usually
applied by hydraulic jacks, and the bolts are then locked in positions or fiberglass/
densified wood wedges are inserted. Under short circuit conditions, the forces

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

271

produced in the windings try to bend the portion of the ring between two
consecutive bolts. The stress on a circular clamping ring can be calculated by
assuming that the structure is simply supported at the location of bolts. The
maximum bending moment (M) and section modulus (Z) of the clamping ring are
given by
(6.50)
(6.51)
and the maximum bending stress is
(6.52)
where F is total axial force, D is mean diameter of the ring, w is width of ring (half
of the difference between its outer diameter and inside diameter), t is thickness of
ring, and n is number of clamping points.
If the stress on the clamping ring is calculated by assuming the fixed beam
conditions, then the bending stress is given by

Figure 6.19 Clamping elements

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

272

Chapter 6

(6.53)
The stress calculated by equation 6.52 is higher than that calculated by equation
6.53. For the design purpose, the stress can be calculated by assuming the
boundary condition as the average of simply supported and fixed beam
conditions, for which M=pFD/(10n2) and
(6.54)
the value of which should be within the limits based on material properties and the
factor of safety.
Stresses in flitch plates and frames:
A flitch plate should be designed for withstanding the clamping force and corewinding weight (static loads). During a short circuit, the axial forces (end thrusts)
developed in windings, act on the top and bottom frames; flitch plates help to keep
the frames in position. The stresses produced in the flitch plates are the tensile
stresses and shearing stresses. These stresses can be calculated by well-known
formulae used in the structural analysis.
The frames are subjected to stresses while lifting core-winding assembly,
during clamping of windings, or due to short circuit end thrusts. Usually, the short
circuit stresses decide their dimensions. The stresses in the frames are determined
from the calculated values of the short circuit forces acting on them and assuming
the core bolt points and locking arrangements (pins, etc.) between flitch plates and
frames as support locations.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

Bergonzi, L., Bertagnolli, G., Cannavale, G., Caprio, G., Iliceto, F., Dilli, B.,
and Gulyesil, O. Power transmission reliability, technical and economic issues
relating to the short circuit performance of power transformers, CIGRE 2000,
Paper No. 12–207.
Bertula, T., Nordman, H., Saunamaki, Y., and Maaskola, J. Short circuit stresses
in three-limb transformers with delta connected inner winding during singlephase faults, CIGRE 1980, Paper No. 12–03.
Anderson, P.M. Analysis of faulted power systems, Iowa State University Press,
1976.
Stevenson, W.D. Elements of power system analysis, Fourth Edition, McGrawHill Book Company, 1982.
Babare, A., Bossi, A., Calabro, S., Caprio, G., and Crepaz, S. Electromagnetic
transients in large power step-up transformers: some design and testing
problems, CIGRE 1990, Paper No. 12–207.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

273

6. Arturi, C.M. Force calculations in transformer windings under unbalanced
mmfs by a non-linear finite element code, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics,
Vol. 28, No. 2, March 1992, pp. 1363–1366.
7. Sollergren, B. Calculation of short circuit forces in transformers, Electra,
Report no. 67, 1979, pp. 29–75.
8. Salon, S., LaMattina, B., and Sivasubramaniam, K. Comparison of assumptions
in computation of short circuit forces in transformers, IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, Vol. 36, No. 5, September 2000, pp. 3521–3523.
9. Bertagnolli, G. Short circuit duty of power transformers–Zthe ABB approach,
Golinelli Industrie Grafiche, Italy, 1996.
10. Waters, M. The short circuit strength of power transformers, Macdonald and
Co. Ltd., London, 1966.
11. Waters, M. The measurement and calculation of axial electromagnetic forces
in concentric transformer windings, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 101, Pt. II, February
l954, pp. 35–46.
12. Norris, E.T. Mechanical strength of power transformers in service, Proceedings
IEE, Vol. 104, February 1957, pp. 289–306.
short circuit strength: requirements, design and demonstration, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-89, No. 8, November/
December 1970, pp. 1955–1969.
14. McNutt, W.J. Short circuit characteristics of transformers, IEEE Summer
Meeting, Portland, July 1976, Paper No. CH1 159–3/76, pp. 30–37.
15. Watts, G.B. A mathematical treatment of the dynamic behavior of a power
transformer winding under axial short circuit forces, Proceedings IEE, Vol.
110, No. 3, March 1963, pp. 551–560.
16. Patel, M.R. Dynamic response of power transformers under axial short circuit
forces, Part I: winding and clamp as individual components, IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-92, September/October 1973, pp.
1558–1566.
17. Patel, M.R. Dynamic response of power transformers under axial short circuit
forces, Part II: windings and clamps as a combined system, IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-92, September/October 1973, pp.
1567–1576.
18. Swihart, D.O. and Wright, D.V. Dynamic stiffness and damping of transformer
pressboard during axial short circuit vibration, IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-95, No. 2, March/April 1976, pp. 721–730.
19. Allan, D.J., Pratt, F.C., Sharpley, W.A., and Woollard, M.E. The short circuit
performance of transformers—a contribution to the alternative to direct testing,
CIGRE 1980, Paper No. 12–02.
20. Tournier, Y., Richard, M., Ciniero, A., Yakov, S., Madin, A.B., and Whitaker,
J.D. A study of the dynamic behavior of transformer windings under short
circuit conditions, CIGRE 1964, Report No. 134.
21. Hori, Y. and Okuyama, K. Axial vibration analysis of transformer windings

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

274

Chapter 6

under short circuit conditions, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. PAS-99, No. 2, March/April 1980, pp. 443–451.
22. Quinney, D.A. Dynamic response of a power transformer winding under axial
short circuit conditions, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 128, Pt. B, No. 2, March 1981,
pp. 114–118.
23. Macor, P., Robert, G., Girardot, D., Riboud, J.C., Ngnegueu, T., Arthaud, J.P.,
and Chemin, E. The short circuit resistance of transformers: The feedback in
France based on tests, service and calculation approaches, CIGRE 2000, Paper
No. 12–102.
24. Lakhiani, V.K. and Kulkarni, S.V. Short circuit withstand of transformers—a
perspective, International Conference on Transformers, TRAFOTECH—2002,
Mumbai, India, January 2002, pp. 34–38.
25. Steel, R.B., Johnson, W.M., Narbus, J.J., Patel, M.R., and Nelson, R.A.
Dynamic measurements in power transformers under short circuit conditions,
CIGRE 1972, Paper No. 12–01.
26. Thomson, H.A., Tillery, F., and Rosenberg, D.U. The dynamic response of
low voltage, high current, disk type transformer windings to through fault
loads, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-98, No.
3, May/June 1979, pp. 1091–1098.
27. Saravolac, M.P., Vertigen, P.A., Sumner, C.A., and Siew, W.H. Design
verification criteria for evaluating the short circuit withstand capability of
transformer inner windings, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–208.
28. Kojima, H., Miyata, H., Shida, S., and Okuyama, K. Buckling strength analysis
of large power transformer windings subjected to electromagnetic force under
short circuit, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS99, No. 3, May/June 1980, pp. 1288–1297.
29. Patel, M.R. Dynamic stability of helical and barrel coils in transformers against
axial short circuit forces, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 127, Pt. C, No. 5, September
1980, pp. 281–284.
30. Patel, M.R. Instability of the continuously transposed cable under axial short
circuit forces in transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 17,
No. 1, January 2002, pp. 149–154.
31. Madin, A.B. and Whitaker, J.D. The dynamic behavior of a transformer winding
under axial short circuit forces: An experimental and theoretical investigation,
Proceedings IEE, Vol. 110, No. 3, 1963, pp. 535–550.
32. Gee, F.W. and Whitaker, J.D. Factors affecting the choice of pre-stress applied
to transformer windings, IEEE Summer General Meeting, Toronto, Canada,
1963, Paper No. 63–1012.
33. Dobsa, J. and Pirktl, E. Transformers and short circuits, Brown Boveri Review,
Vol. 52, No. 11/12, November/December 1965, pp. 821–830.
34. Janssen, A.L.J. and te Paske, L.H. Short circuit testing experience with large
power transformers, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–105.
35. Leber, G. Investigation of inrush currents during a short circuit test on a 440
MVA, 400 kV GSU transformer, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–104.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Short Circuit Stresses and Strength

275

36. Steurer, M. and Frohlich, K. The impact of inrush currents on the mechanical
stress of high voltage power transformer coils, IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Vol. 17, No. 1, January 2002, pp. 155–160.
37. Adly, A.A. Computation of inrush current forces on transformer windings,
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 37, No. 4, July 2001, pp. 2855–2857.
38. Stuchl, P., Dolezel, L, Zajic, A., Hruza, J., and Weinberg, O. Performance of
transformers with split winding under nonstandard operating conditions,
CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–103.
39. Foldi, J., Berube, D., Riffon, P., Bertagnolli, G., and Maggi, R. Recent
achievements in performing short circuit withstand tests on large power
transformers in Canada, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–201.
40. Dwight, H.B. Electrical coils and conductors, First Edition, McGraw-Hill
Book Company Inc., New York, 1945.
41. Rodstein, L. Electrical control equipment, MIR Publishers, Moscow, Translated
in English by G.Roberts, 1974.
42. Charles, E.D. Mechanical forces on current-carrying conductors, Proceedings
IEE, Vol. 110, No. 9, September 1963, pp. 1671–1677.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

7
Surge Phenomena in Transformers

For designing the insulation of a transformer suitable for all kinds of overvoltages,
the voltage stresses within the windings need to be determined. For this purpose,
voltage distributions within the transformer windings for the specific test voltages
are calculated. For AC test voltages of power frequency, the voltage distribution is
linear with respect to the number of turns and can be calculated exactly. For the
calculation of the impulse voltage distribution in the windings, they are required
to be simulated in terms of an equivalent circuit consisting of lumped R, L and C
elements. There are a number of accurate methods described in the literature for
computation of winding response to impulse voltages, some of which are
discussed in this chapter. Electric stresses in the insulation within and outside the
windings are obtained by analytical or numerical techniques which are described
in the next chapter.

7.1 Initial Voltage Distribution
When a step voltage impinges on the transformer winding terminals, the initial
distribution in the winding depends on the capacitances between turns, between
windings, and those between windings and ground. The winding inductances have
no effect on the initial voltage distribution since the magnetic field requires a finite
time to build up (current in an inductance cannot be established instantaneously).
Thus, the inductances practically do not carry any current, and the voltage
distribution is predominantly decided by the capacitances in the network, and the
problem can be considered as entirely electrostatic without any appreciable error.
In other words, the presence of series capacitances between winding sections
causes the transformer to respond to abrupt impulses as a network of capacitances
for all frequencies above its lower natural frequencies of oscillations. When the
applied voltage is maintained for a sufficient time (50 to 100 microseconds),
277
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

278

Chapter 7

appreciable currents begin to flow in the inductances eventually leading to the
uniform voltage distribution. Since there is difference between the initial and final
voltage distributions, as shown in figure 7.1, a transient phenomenon takes place
during which the voltage distribution readjusts itself from the initial to final value.
During this transient period, there is continual interchange of energy between
electric and magnetic fields. On account of a low damping factor of the
transformer windings, the transient is oscillatory. The voltage at any point in the
winding oscillates about the final voltage value, reaching a maximum as shown by
curve c. It is obvious that the strength of the transformer windings to lightning
voltages can be significantly increased if the difference between the initial and
final distributions can be minimized. This not only reduces the excessive stresses
at the line end but also mitigates the oscillations thereby keeping voltage to ground
at any point in the winding insignificantly higher than the final voltage
distribution.
The differential equation governing the initial voltage distribution u0=u(x,0),
for the representation of a winding shown in figure 7.2 (and ignoring inductive
effects), is [1]
(7.1)

In figure 7.2, Ls, cg and cs denote self inductance per unit length, shunt capacitance
per unit length to ground and series capacitance per unit length between adjacent
turns respectively.

Figure 7.1 Impulse voltage distribution

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

279

Figure 7.2 Representation of a transformer winding

Solution of the above equation is given by
µ0=A1ekx+A2e-kx

(7.2)

where
(7.3)
The constants of integration A1 and A2 can be obtained from the boundary
conditions at the line and neutral ends of the winding. For the solidly grounded
neutral, we have µ0=0 for x=0. Putting these values in equation 7.2 we get
A1+A2=0 or A1=-A2
Whereas at the line end, x=L (L is the winding axial length) and u0=U (amplitude
of the step impulse voltage) giving

(7.4)

Substituting the above expression in equation 7.2 we get
(7.5)

The initial voltage gradient at the line end of the winding is given by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

280

Chapter 7

(7.6)

The initial voltage gradient is maximum at the line end. Since kL>3 in practice,
giving the initial gradient at the line end for a unit amplitude surge
coth
(U=1)as
(7.7)
The uniform gradient for the unit amplitude surge is 1/L.

(7.8)
where CG and CS are the total ground capacitance and series capacitance of the
transformer winding respectively. The ratio
has been denoted by the
distribution constant α. Thus, the maximum initial gradient at the line end is α
times the uniform gradient. The higher the value of ground capacitance, the higher
are the values of α and voltage stress at the line end.
For the isolated neutral condition, the boundary conditions,

give the following expression for the initial voltage distribution:
(7.9)
For the isolated neutral condition, the maximum initial gradient at the line end can
be written as
(7.10)
For a unit amplitude surge and (α=kL)>3,
becomes

Hence, the initial gradient

(7.11)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

281

Figure 7.3 Initial voltage distribution

Hence, the value of maximum initial gradient at the line end is the same for the
grounded and isolated neutral conditions for abrupt impulses or very steep wave
fronts. The initial voltage distribution for various values of a is plotted in figure
7.3 for the grounded and isolated neutral conditions. The total series capacitance
(CS) and ground capacitance (CG) of the transformer winding predominantly
decide the initial stresses in it for steep fronted voltage surges. The total series
capacitance consists of capacitance between turns and capacitance between disks/
sections of the winding, whereas the total ground capacitance includes the
capacitance between the winding and core/tank/other windings. Thus, the initial
voltage distribution is characterized by the distribution constant,
(7.12)

This parameter indicates the degree of deviation of the initial voltage distribution
from the final linear voltage distribution which is decided solely by winding
inductances. The higher the value of α , the higher are the deviation and
amplitudes of oscillations which occur between the initial and final voltage
distributions. For a conventional continuous disk winding, the value of α may be
in the range of 5 to 30. Any change in the transformer design, which decreases the
distribution constant of the winding, results in a more uniform voltage distribution
and reduces the voltage stresses between different parts of the winding. The initial
voltage distribution of the winding can be made closer to the ideal linear
distribution (α=0) by increasing its series capacitance and/ or reducing its
capacitance to ground. If the ground capacitance is reduced, more current flows
through the series capacitances, tending to make the voltage across the various
winding sections more uniform. The (ideal) uniform initial impulse voltage
distribution will be achieved if no current flows through the (shunt) ground
capacitances. Usually, it is very difficult and less cost-effective to reduce the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

282

Chapter 7

ground capacitances. Insulation gaps between windings predominantly decide the
ground capacitances. These capacitances depend on the radial gap and
circumferential area between the windings. These geometrical quantities get
usually fixed from optimum electrical design considerations. Hence, any attempt
to decrease the distribution constant α by decreasing the ground capacitance is
definitely limited. The more cost-effective way is to increase the winding series
capacitance by using different types of windings as described in the subsequent
sections.

7.2 Capacitance Calculations
In order to estimate the voltage distribution within a transformer winding
subjected to impulse overvoltages, the knowledge of its effective series and
ground capacitances is essential. The calculation of ground capacitance between a
winding and ground or between two windings is straightforward. The capacitance
between two concentric windings (or between the innermost winding and core) is
given by
(7.13)
where Dm is mean diameter of the gap between two windings, toil and tsolid are
thicknesses of oil and solid insulations between two windings respectively, and H
is height of windings (if the heights of two windings are unequal, average height is
taken in the calculation).
Capacitance between a cylindrical conductor and ground plane is given by
(appendix B, equation B30)

(7.14)
where R and H are radius and length of the cylindrical conductor respectively and
s is distance of center of the cylindrical conductor from the plane. Hence, the
capacitance between a winding and tank can be given as

(7.15)

In this case, R and H represent the radius and height of the winding respectively
and s is the distance of the winding axis from the plane. The capacitance between
the outermost windings of two phases is half the value given by above equation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

283

7.15, with s equal to half the value of distance between the axes of the two
windings (refer to equation B28).

7.3 Capacitance of Windings
7.3.1 Development of winding methods for better impulse response
In the initial days of transformer technology development for higher voltages, use
of electrostatic shields was quite common (see figure 7.4). A non-resonating
transformer with electrostatic shields was reported in [2,3,4]. It is a very effective
shielding method in which the effect of the ground capacitance of individual
section is neutralized by the corresponding capacitance to the shield. Thus, the
currents in the shunt (ground) capacitances are supplied from the shields and none
of them have to flow through the series capacitances of the winding. If the series
capacitances along the windings are made equal, the uniform initial voltage
distribution can be achieved. The electrostatic shield is at the line terminal
potential and hence requires to be insulated from the winding and tank along its
height. As the voltage ratings and corresponding dielectric test levels increased,
transformer designers found it increasingly difficult and cumbersome to design
the shields. The shields were found to be less cost-effective since extra space and
material were required for insulating shields from other electrodes inside the
transformer. Subsequent development of interleaved windings phased out
completely the use of electrostatic shielding method. The principle of electrostatic
shielding method is being made use of in the form of static end rings at the line end
and static rings within the winding which improve the voltage distribution and
reduce the stresses locally.

Figure 7.4 Electrostatic shields

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

284

Chapter 7

Figure 7.5 Continuous winding

In order to understand the effectiveness of an interleaved winding, let us first
analyze a continuous (disk) winding shown in figure 7.5. The total series
capacitance of the continuous winding is an equivalent of all the turn-to-turn and
disk-to-disk capacitances. Although the capacitance between two adjacent turns is
quite high, all the turn-to-turn capacitances are in series, which results in a much
smaller capacitance for the entire winding. Similarly, all the disk-to-disk
capacitances which are also in series, add up to a small value. With the increase in
voltage class of the winding, the insulation between turns and between disks has
to be increased which further worsens the total series capacitance.
The inherent disadvantage of low series capacitance of the continuous winding
was overcome by electrostatic shielding as explained earlier till the advent of the
interleaved winding. The original interleaved winding was introduced and
patented by G.F.Stearn in 1950 [5]. A simple disposition of turns in some
particular ways increases the series capacitance of the interleaved winding to such
an extent that a near uniform initial voltage distribution can be obtained. A typical
interleaved winding is shown in figure 7.6.

Figure 7.6 Interleaved winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

285

In an interleaved winding, two consecutive electrical turns are separated
physically by a turn which is electrically much farther along the winding. It is
wound as a conventional continuous disk winding but with two conductors. The
radial position of the two conductors is interchanged (cross-over between
conductors) at the inside diameter and appropriate conductors are joined at the
outside diameter, thus forming a single circuit two-disk coil. The advantage is
obvious since it does not require any additional space as in the case of complete
electrostatic shielding or part electrostatic shielding (static ring). In interleaved
windings, not only the series capacitance is increased significantly but the ground
capacitance is also somewhat reduced because of the improvement in the winding
space factor. This is because the insulation within the winding in the axial
direction can be reduced (due to improvement in the voltage distribution), which
reduces the winding height and hence the ground capacitance. Therefore, the
distribution constant (α) is reduced significantly lowering stresses between
various parts of the winding.
It can be seen from figure 7.6 that the normal working voltage between
adjacent turns in an interleaved winding is equal to voltage per turn times the turns
per disk. Hence, one may feel that a much higher amount of turn insulation may be
required, thus questioning the effectiveness of the interleaved winding. However,
due to a significant improvement in the voltage distribution, stresses between
turns are reduced by a great extent so that % safety margins for the impulse stress
and normal working stress can be made of the same order. Hence, the turn-to-turn
insulation is used in more effective way [6]. Since the voltage distribution is more
uniform, the number of special insulation components (e.g., disk angle rings)
along the winding height reduces. When a winding has more than one conductor
per turn, the conductors are also interleaved as shown in figure 7.7 (a winding with
6 turns per disk and two parallel conductors per turn) to get maximum benefit
from the method of interleaving.

Figure 7.7 Interleaving with 2-parallel conductors per turn

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

286

Chapter 7

Figure 7.8 Two types of crossovers in interleaved winding

In [7], improved surge characteristics of interleaved windings are explained
based on transmission line like representation of the disks with surge impedance,
without recourse to the hypothesis of increased series capacitance.
There can be two types of interleaved windings as regards the crossover
connections at the inside diameter as shown in figure 7.8. When steep impulse
waves such as chopped waves or front-of-waves enter an interleaved winding, a
high oscillatory voltage occurs locally between turns at the center of the radial
build of the disk. This phenomenon is analyzed in [8,9] for these two types of
crossovers in the interleaved windings.
7.3.2 Turn-to-turn and disk-to-disk capacitances
For the calculation of series capacitances of different types of windings, the
calculations of turn-to-turn and disk-to-disk capacitances are essential. The turnto-turn capacitance is given by
(7.16)
where Dm is average diameter of winding, w is bare width of conductor in axial
direction, tp is total paper insulation thickness (both sides), ε0 is permittivity of the
free space, and εp is relative permittivity of paper insulation. The term tp is added to
the conductor width to account for fringing effects.
Similarly, the total axial capacitance between two consecutive disks based on
geometrical considerations only is given by

(7.17)
where R is winding radial depth, ts and εs are thickness and relative permittivity of
solid insulation (radial spacer between disks) respectively, and k is fraction of
circumferential space occupied by oil. The term ts is added to R to take into
account fringing effects.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

287

For continuous winding and its variations (with static end rings/static rings
between disks), there are two approaches for calculating the series capacitance. In
the first approach, the voltage is assumed to be evenly distributed within the disk
winding, which makes the calculation quite easy. However, this is a major
approximation for continuous disks having small effective inter-turn series
capacitance. Hence, the second approach is more accurate in which the linear
voltage distribution is not assumed within the disks for the capacitance calculation
[10,11,12]. The corresponding representation of capacitances for this accurate
method of calculation is shown in figure 7.9. The total series capacitance of the
winding is given by [10,13]

(7.18)

where CDA =disk-to-disk capacitance calculated based on geometrical
considerations

αd=distribution constant of disk =
CT=turn-to-turn capacitance
ND=number of turns per disk
NDW=number of disks in the winding

Figure 7.9 Representation of capacitances of a continuous winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

288

Chapter 7

Figure 7.10 Disk-pair of a continuous winding

The first approach, in which linear voltage distribution is assumed for
capacitance calculations, is definitely approximate for continuous windings. The
total series capacitance of a disk is small and also the disk-to-disk capacitance
(CDA) is appreciable, making the distribution constant αd for the disk larger. Hence,
the voltage distribution within the disk and within the winding is non-linear.
However, the approach is easier and the expressions obtained for the capacitances
of various types of windings can be easily compared. The approach is used in the
following sub-sections for the calculation of the series capacitance of various
windings including continuous windings.
7.3.3 Continuous disk winding
Let us find the capacitance of a disk pair of a continuous winding shown in figure
7.10 with the assumption of linear voltage distribution. The term CT denotes
capacitance between touching turns and CD denotes capacitance between a turn of
one disk and the corresponding turn of the other disk. If ND is number of turns in a
disk, then number of inter-turn capacitances (CT) in each disk is (ND-1). Also,
number of inter-section capacitances (CD) between the two disks is (ND-1). The
series capacitance of the disk winding is the resultant of the inter-turn (turn-toturn) and inter-disk (disk-to-disk) capacitances. The voltage per turn for the disk
pair shown in figure 7.10 is (V/2ND). Using the principle that the sum of energies
in the individual capacitances within the disk is equal to the entire energy of the
disk coil, the following equation can be written:

where CTR=resultant inter-turn capacitance.
(7.19)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

289

Now, the voltages across the first, second and third inter-disk capacitances (CD)
from the inside diameter are

Hence, the expression for CD at the outside diameter is
The total energy stored by all such capacitances is

(7.20)
Simplifying and using the identity:
we get
(7.21)
where CDR is the resultant inter-disk capacitance.
(7.22)
Instead of using the lumped parameter approach for the inter-disk capacitances, if
they are represented by a distributed capacitance CDU (capacitance per unit radial
depth based on the geometrical considerations only), then the value of resultant
inter-disk capacitance for aradial depth of R can be calculated as [14]
(7.23)
The previous two equations are equivalent, because if the number of turns per disk
is much greater than 1(ND>>1), equation 7.22 becomes

The resultant series capacitance of the disk pair is given as the addition of the
resultant inter-turn capacitance and the resultant inter-disk capacitance,
.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

(7.24)

290

Chapter 7

or
(7.25)
Now, if there are NDW disks in the winding, the resultant inter-disk capacitance
(CDR)W for the entire winding (with a voltage Vw across it) can be calculated as
(7.26)

(7.27)
Noting the fact that the expression for CTR given by equation 7.19 is for two disks,
the total series capacitance for the entire winding with NDW disks can be given by
using equations 7.19 and 7.27 as
(7.28)
The above expression gives the value of capacitance close to that given by
equation 7.18 for the values of disk distribution constant αd close to 1 (almost
linear distribution within disk). For NDW, ND>>1, the equation 7.28 becomes
(7.29)

7.3.4 Continuous winding with SER and SR
As mentioned earlier, the concept of electrostatic shielding is used in a limited
way by having a static end ring (SER) at line end or a static ring (SR) between
disks as shown in figure 7.11.

Figure 7.11 Static end ring (SER) and static ring (SR)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

291

By providing a large equipotential surface with a good corner radius, SER
reduces the stress concentration at the line end. It also improves the effective
series capacitance at the line end as explained below. The closer the location of
SER to the line end disk, the greater the increase in the series capacitance value is.
This results in reduction of stresses appearing within the line end disk during the
initial voltage distribution.
Let us calculate the increase in series capacitance of a disk pair with SER as per
the method given in [14]. SER is usually connected to the first turn of the winding
by means of a pig-tail; hence the potential of SER gets fixed to that of line terminal
(V) as shown in figure 7.12. Let the winding radial depth be denoted by R.
The voltage at any point x of the upper section representing SER is
V1(x)=V

(7.30)

and the voltage at any point x of the lower section representing the first disk is
(7.31)

Let CSU be the capacitance between SER and the first disk per unit depth of the
winding (based on the geometrical considerations only). Therefore, the energy of
the capacitance CSU per unit depth at point x is
(7.32)

Figure 7.12 Calculation of capacitance between SER and line end disk

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

292

Chapter 7

The total energy stored by the capacitance between the first disk and SER is
(7.33)
Substituting the values of V1(x) and V2(x) from equations 7.30 and 7.31, and
simplifying we get
(7.34)
Thus, the resultant capacitance, CSER, between SER and the first disk can be given
by the equation
(7.35)

(7.36)
Thus, the resultant capacitance between SER and the first disk is (1/12) times the
capacitance obtained purely from the geometrical considerations.
Using equations 7.25 and 7.36, the total series capacitance of the disk pair with
SER is therefore given by
(7.37)
Similarly, the expression for the series capacitance of a disk-pair with static ring
(shown in figure 7.11) can be found as
(7.38)
where the first, second and third terms on right hand side of the above equation
represent the inter-turn capacitances, first disk to SR capacitance, and SR to
second disk capacitance respectively. Here, it is assumed that the gap between the
first disk and SR is equal to the gap between SR and the second disk.
7.3.5 Interleaved winding
As explained earlier, an interleaved winding results in a considerable increase of
series capacitance. In this type of winding, geometrically adjacent turns are kept
far away from each other electrically, so that the voltage between adjacent turns

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

293

increases. By interleaving the turns in such a way, the initial voltage distribution
can be made more uniform. The capacitance between the disks (inter-disk
capacitance) has very little effect on the series capacitance of this type of winding
since its value is relatively low. Therefore, it is sufficient to consider only the interturn capacitances for the calculation of series capacitance of the interleaved
windings. It follows that for the interleaved windings, the second approach of
capacitance calculation based on the assumption of linear voltage distribution is
quite accurate as compared to the continuous windings.
For the interleaved winding shown in figure 7.6, the number of inter-turn
capacitances per disk is (ND -1). The total number of inter-turn capacitances in a
disk-pair is 2(ND-1). As before, let V be the voltage applied across the terminals of
the disk-pair. The voltage is assumed to be uniformly distributed over the diskpair; the assumption is more appropriate for interleaved windings as explained
earlier. For the interleaved winding shown in figure 7.6, the number of electrical
turns between the first and second turn is 10, while that between the second and
third turn is 9. This arrangement repeats alternately within the disks. Hence, the
voltage across the ND capacitances is (V/2) and across the remaining (ND–2)
capacitances is

The energy stored in the disk-pair is given by

(7.39)

For ND>>1, the expression simplifies to
(7.40)
The interleaving of turns can give a substantial increase in the series
capacitance of a winding and hence interleaved windings are used widely in high
voltage transformers. As the rating of power transformer increases, higher core
diameters are used increasing the voltage per turn value. Hence, a high voltage
winding of a large rating transformer has usually lower turns and correspondingly
lower turns per disk as compared to a high voltage winding of the same voltage
class in a lower rating transformer. Since the interleaved windings are more
effective for higher turns per disk, they may not be attractive for use in highvoltage high-rating transformers. Added to this, as the rating increases, the current

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

294

Chapter 7

carried by the high voltage winding increases, necessitating the use of a large
number of parallel conductors for controlling the winding eddy losses. The
interleaved winding with a large parallel conductors is difficult from productivity
point of view. Hence, an alternative method of increasing capacitance by use of
shielded-conductor (wound-in-shields) is adopted for high voltage windings of
large power transformers. This is because of the fact that the continuously
transposed cable (CTC) conductor, which is ideally suited for such applications
(as explained in Chapter 4), can be used with this shielded-conductor winding
technology.
7.3.6 Shielded-conductor winding
A shielded-conductor winding gives a modest but sufficient increase in the series
capacitance and is less labour intensive as compared to an interleaved winding.
The number of shielded-conductors can be gradually reduced in the shielded disks
from the line end, giving a possibility of achieving tapered capacitance profile to
match the voltage stress profile along the height of the winding [15]. This type of
winding has some disadvantages, viz. decrease in winding space factor,
requirement of extra winding material (shields), possibility of disturbance in
ampere-turn balance per unit height of LV and HV windings, and extra eddy loss
in shields.
Let us calculate the total series capacitance of a shielded-conductor disk-pair
shown in figure 7.13. For ND turns per disk with an applied voltage of V across the
disk-pair, the voltage per turn is V/(2ND). It is assumed that for shields also, the
same value of voltage per turn is applicable. Out of ND turns, the first k turns are
shielded in each disk. The shield can be either floating or it can be connected to
some turn. Here, the shield conductors are assumed to be floating. For the first
disk the voltage of any turn is
(7.41)
The voltage of ith shield turn is given by
(7.42)

Figure 7.13 Shielded-conductor winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

295

If Csh denotes the capacitance between a shield turn and adjacent disk turn, the
energy between a shield turn i and touching adjacent disk turns is
(7.43)
Using the expressions from equations 7.41 and 7.42 we get
(7.44)
Similarly for the second disk, voltages of ith turn and ith shield are given by
(7.45)

(7.46)
The energy between a shield turn i and touching adjacent disk turns for the second
disk can be similarly calculated as
(7.47)
There are 2×(ND-k-1) turn-to-turn capacitances and the energy stored in each of
these capacitances is
(7.48)
The expression for energy between the disks can be given by using equations 7.21
and 7.23 as
(7.49)
For the type of shielded-conductor winding shown in figure 7.13, there is no
contribution to the energy due to the capacitances between corresponding shield
turns of the two disks, since they are at the same potential. For a precise
calculation, the radial depth in the above equation should correspond to the radial
depth of the winding excluding that of shield turns. The total energy stored in the
disk-pair with shielded-conductors is
En=k Ens1+k Ens2+2(ND-k-1)EnT+EnD

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

(7.50)

296

Chapter 7

from which the effective capacitance of the disk-pair can be calculated. The
similar procedure can be followed if, through an electrical connection, the shield
is attached to some potential instead of the being in the floating condition. The
calculation of capacitances of shielded-conductor winding has been verified in
[15] by a circuit model and also by measurements on a prototype model.
7.3.7 Layer winding
For a simple layer (spiral) winding shown in figure 7.14, wherein an individual
turn may have a number of parallel conductors depending upon the current rating,
the series capacitance can be found as follows.
Let CT be the inter-turn (turn-to-turn) capacitance and Nw be the total number of
turns in the winding. As before, the voltage is assumed to be uniformly distributed
within the winding. The energy stored in the winding is equal to the sum of the
energies stored in the individual capacitances,
(7.51)

(7.52)
For a helical winding (layer winding with radial spacer insulation between turns),
the above equation applies with CT calculated by using equation 7.17 with the
consideration of proportion of area occupied by spacers (solid insulation) and oil.
7.3.8 Interleaved tap winding
In high-voltage high-rating transformers, when a spiral winding is used as a tap
winding, the tap sections are interleaved as shown in figure 7.15. The tap winding
consists of 8 circuits (steps) giving a voltage difference between adjacent turns
either corresponding to one-circuit difference or two-circuit difference. Thus, if
there are 10 turns per circuit, the voltage difference between touching turns is
either equal to 10 or 20 times the voltage per turn. This higher voltage difference
necessitates the use of higher paper insulation reducing capacitance, but the
reduction is more than compensated by the increased capacitive effect due to
higher voltage between turns.

Figure 7.14 Layer winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

297

Figure 7.15 Interleaved tap winding

Let us calculate the value of series capacitance of an interleaved winding
having 8 circuits with 10 turns per circuit, giving a total of 80 turns for the tap
winding. Assuming again that the voltage is uniformly distributed within the tap
winding with voltage per turn as V/80, the energy stored in the tap winding is

(7.53)
2

Simplifying and equating it to (1/2)Cs V , we get the effective series capacitance of
the interleaved tap winding as
(7.54)
Comparing this value of series capacitance with that of layer winding of 80 turns
as given by equation 7.52, it can be seen that the series capacitance has increased
by about 320 times. The series capacitance for any other type of interleaved tap
winding, with different turns per circuit and number of circuits, can be easily
calculated by following the same procedure.
The method presented till now for the calculation of series capacitance of
windings is based on the energy stored. There are a number of other methods
reported in the literature. A rigorous analytical method is presented in [16] to
calculate the equivalent series capacitance of windings. The method is also used to
determine the natural frequencies and internal oscillations of windings.
The analytical methods have the disadvantage that the fringing effects and
corresponding stray capacitances cannot be accurately taken into account. In this
respect, numerical methods like Finite Element Method (FEM) can accurately
give the value of capacitance which accounts stray effects also. In FEM analysis
also, the capacitance is calculated from the stored energy (En) as
(7.55)
The procedure is similar to that of the leakage inductance calculation by FEM
analysis as described in Chapter 3.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

298

Chapter 7

Figure 7.16 Capacitance calculation by FEM analysis

The series capacitance of a disk-pair of a continuous disk winding and
interleaved winding has been calculated by FEM analysis for the geometry shown
in figure 7.16 (dimensions are in mm). The gap between two disks is 6 mm. There
are 6 turns per disk, and a uniform voltage distribution is assumed. The relative
permittivities of oil and paper insulation are taken as 2.2 and 3.5 respectively. The
geometry is enclosed in a rectangular boundary at a distance of 1 meter from the
disks on all the sides, so that the boundary conditions do not affect the potential
distribution in the disks. The energy is calculated for the rectangular area ABCD.
The values of capacitance per unit length calculated by the analytical formulae
(equations 7.25 and 7.40) and FEM analysis are given in table 7.1.

7.4 Inductance Calculation
Insulation design based on only initial voltage distribution (with inductances
neglected) may be acceptable for transformers of smaller voltage rating. The
difference between the initial and final (linear) distributions sets up oscillations in
the winding. According to Weed’s principle [17], a winding will be nonoscillating if the capacitive (initial) and inductive (final) distributions are alike,
otherwise the difference will set up an oscillation under conditions favorable to it,
and such an oscillation may result into much larger voltage gradients between
different parts of the winding. Hence, the voltage distribution under impulse
conditions should be calculated with the inclusion of inductances in the winding
representation.

Table 7.1 Capacitance calculation by analytical method and FEM analysis

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

299

The mutual inductance between two thin wire, coaxial coil loops (A and B)
of radii RA and RB with a distance S between them is given in SI units as [15,
18,19]
(7.56)
where

(7.57)
and NA and NB are the turns in sections A and B respectively, whereas K(k) and E(k)
are the complete elliptic integrals of the first and second kinds respectively. The
formula is applicable for thin circular filaments of negligible cross section. For
circular coils of rectangular cross section, more accurate calculations can be done
by using Lyle’s method in combination with equation 7.56 [20,21].
The self inductance of a single turn circular coil of square cross section with an
average radius of α and square side length c is given in SI units as [15, 20]

(7.58)
The formula applies for relatively small cross section such that (c/2a)<0.2. If the
cross section is not square, it should be divided into a number of square cross
sections, and then equations 7.56 and 7.58 can be used to compute the self
inductance.
Accuracy of the calculated self and mutual inductances may significantly
affect the results of computed impulse voltage distribution. The difference
between the calculated and measured results is mainly due to effects of the field
distortion and variation within the core at high frequencies [22]. For accurate
results the field equations need to be solved which may not be practical. Hence, in
practice correction factors are applied to the formulae for self and mutual
inductances.
Some formulations reported in the literature use customary short circuit
inductances (which are more easily and accurately calculated) in place of self and
mutual inductances [23,24]. Some others [25] use the network of inductances
derived through the theory of magnetic networks, which avoids introduction of
mutual inductances in the network of lumped parameters.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

300

Chapter 7

7.5 Standing Waves and Traveling Waves
The transient response of a winding subjected to impulse waves was initially
obtained in the literature by two different methods: the standing wave and the
traveling wave approach. The theory of electrical waves in transmission lines
cannot be directly applied to transformers due to the fact that transformer, unlike
transmission line, has series capacitances and mutual inductances between
winding sections.
Consider a single layer winding having self inductance (Ls) per unit length,
shunt capacitance (cg) per unit length to ground and series capacitance (cs) per unit
length between adjacent turns (see figure 7.2). In this model, the mutual
inductance between turns and the resistance of winding are neglected for the
purpose of simplifying the calculations. The set of differential equations
describing the transient process taking place in the winding can be given by
applying Kirchhoff’ s laws as (notations as per figure 7.2)
(7.59)

(7.60)

(7.61)

By eliminating the currents in the above 3 equations, these can be reduced to a
single differential equation in terms of voltage as
(7.62)

The solution of equation 7.62 gives the transient voltage distribution inside the
winding. Let us assume the solution of this equation in the form [4,26],
(7.63)
Since the solution contains exponential terms in both time and space, it includes
both standing and traveling waves.
In the standing wave approach, the expression of assumed solution is put in
equation 7.62 which after simplification becomes
(7.64)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

301

(7.65)
and
(7.66)
It can be seen from the equations 7.65 and 7.66 that both space frequency (ψ:
number of standing wave cycles within the space interval of 2 p) and angular
frequency (ω) are related to each other. With ψ→∞, the critical angular frequency
of the winding is obtained as

(7.67)

This is the highest frequency in time with which the winding is capable of
oscillating. It is equal to the natural frequency of a single turn with inductance Ls
and capacitance cs.
In the classical standing wave theory, the oscillations between the initial and
final voltage distributions are resolved into a series of standing waves or
harmonics both in space and time [1,27, 28]. A study of the oscillations
throughout the transition period from the initial to final distribution, allows the
calculation of the surge voltage distribution within the winding. In this approach,
the wave-shapes and frequencies of standing waves (eigen functions or natural
modes) of the winding, not connected to any source, are determined for various
terminal conditions. The natural frequencies of these free oscillations are
computed and voltage distribution for each harmonic is obtained. The amplitudes
of all these standing waves are then obtained for the applied wave shape, and the
transient voltage distribution along the winding is finally obtained as the sum of
all harmonics, a convergent infinite series. The contribution of each harmonic
depends on its wave shape and natural frequency, and on its amplitude. The
amplitude in turn depends on the difference between the initial and final
distributions. Initially, mutual inductances were totally or partly neglected
simplifying the analysis. Later on, the effect of mutual inductances was also
included [29] for more accurate determination of standing waves.
In the traveling wave theory, the incident wave is represented as an infinite
series of sinusoidal components, and the resulting differential equation is
analyzed to determine the conditions under which these waves can enter the
winding. The method was explained in [26,30] by its application to windings with

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

302

Chapter 7

uniformly distributed insulation, and for incoming surges with vertical wave
fronts and infinite tails. The traveling wave based analysis is superior and
computationally less intensive than that based on the standing wave theory. The
solution of the original differential equation 7.62 is assumed in the traveling wave
theory as [26]
(7.68)
which describes the traveling waves. These waves oscillate with time frequency ω
and propagate at velocity v through the winding. The above solution and the
previously assumed solution (equation 7.63) are equivalent for ψ=(-ω/v). By
substituting equation 7.68 into equation 7.62 and differentiating we get
(7.69)
By solving the above equation, we get the equation for velocity of propagation,
(7.70)
Equation 7.70 indicates that as the angular frequency (ω) increases, the velocity of
traveling wave (v) decreases. For
(7.71)
the velocity of propagation is zero, which means that at ω≥ωcr the traveling waves
cannot propagate inside the winding.
In case of standing waves, for ω>ωcr, the ψ in equation 7.65 becomes imaginary
and the solution according to equation 7.63 is transformed into
u=Uej?te-?x

(7.72)

where
(7.73)
Thus, for supercritical frequencies (ω>ωcr), no standing or traveling waves exist
within the winding; there is an exponential attenuation of the voltage from the
winding terminal towards the interior.
A transformer winding can propagate only those oscillations having a
frequency below a certain critical value. The traveling wave generally gets
flattened as it travels into the winding. Unlike in transmission lines, there is no

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

303

simple relationship between the wavelength and frequency for a wave traveling
through the transformer winding, and hence it cannot penetrate into the winding
without distortion. Due to presence of mutual inductances and series capacitances
between sections of the transformer winding, there is a continual change in the
form of the complex wave as it penetrates inside the winding; the phenomenon is
in marked contrast to that of transmission lines, where a complex wave of any
shape propagates without distortion, except for the effect of resistances. A
traveling wave does not change its shape when its velocity is independent of
frequency, and all natural oscillations have the same decay coefficient [31]. While
both these conditions are approximately satisfied for a transmission line (and the
waveshape is maintained), these are not satisfied for a transformer resulting in a
major distortion of traveling waves inside the winding. Higher frequency
oscillations cannot penetrate deeply into the winding and establish a standing
exponential distribution (exponential attenuation of voltage from the terminal
towards the interior) similar to the initial distribution of the standing wave analysis
[3]. In other words, the high frequency components form a standing potential
distribution and the low frequency components form a traveling wave; the
splitting of incoming surge into two parts is the characteristics of the traveling
wave theory. In [32], the standing wave and traveling wave approaches are
compared and correlated.
The traveling component moves along the winding conductor with a velocity
governed by the fundamental equation,
(7.74)
where µ and ε are the permeability and permittivity of the medium respectively,

Hence, for a oil cooled transformer with ε r=3.5 (typical value of resultant
dielectric constant of oil-paper-solid insulation system) and µr=1, the velocity of
travel of a wave into the winding will be approximately equal to 160 m/µs.

7.6 Methods for Analysis of Impulse Distribution
Although the surge response of transformer windings was initially determined by
two theories, the standing wave theory and the traveling wave theory, which
helped in understanding and visualizing the surge phenomena, these methods had
the disadvantage that they can be basically applied only to a uniform winding.
Non-uniformities within the windings, presence of more than one winding per
limb, windings of other phases, etc. are some of the complexities which cannot be

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

304

Chapter 7

handled by these two theories. Hence, it is impractical to do the analysis by purely
analytical means for increasingly complicated present-day transformers. With the
advent of computers, it became possible to solve the differential equations
numerically and analyze practical transformer winding configurations. A lumped
parameter network is particularly well suited for solution by computers. Using the
Laplace transform, analysis of a ladder network having a finite number of uniform
winding sections was done in [33]. Subsequently with the advent of digital
computers, the network is solved by using both digital and analogue computers in
[24]. The digital computer is used to calculate the coefficients of simultaneous
integrodifferential equations which are then solved by an electronic analogue
computer. A numerical analysis reported in [22] uses Runge-Kutta method to
solve a second order differential equation. In [34] differential equations,
formulated for the equivalent network using the state space approach, are solved
by computer.
In [35], the transient response is calculated using the trapezoidal rule of
integration through the companion network approach. It is easier to analyze a
network for transient response calculations if there are no mutual couplings.
Hence, the equivalent network with coupled elements is replaced by that with
uncoupled elements by using the formulation given in [36]. The two circuits
(coupled and uncoupled) are equivalent and have the same nodal admittance
matrix. The advantage of using companion network is that it can be analyzed
using well-known methods since it is purely resistive circuit.
The equivalent circuit representation is quite popularly used for finding
response of a transformer winding to high voltage surges. During transients, the
windings are coupled by electric and magnetic fields. The inductances (self and
mutual) and capacitances are distributed along the windings. The transients can be
described by partial differential equations, but their solution is very difficult. If the
windings are subdivided into sections in which inductances and capacitances are
lumped, the calculation becomes easier since the partial differential equations can
be now replaced with close approximation by ordinary simultaneous differential
equations. These ordinary differential equations can be solved by numerical
analysis using computers for complex configurations of windings. The accuracy
of results obtained from the circuit representation depends predominantly on the
degree of sophistication used in the winding representation. In one of the most
accurate representations, each turn of the winding is represented with
corresponding turn-to-turn capacitances and inductances [37]. The knowledge of
voltage distribution across the inter-turn insulation is important for transformers
exposed to very fast transient overvoltages. Such a model, although very accurate,
may be prohibitive from the point of time and memory of computers. Hence, from
practical point of view, many simplifications are done in the detailed model. A
sufficient accuracy can be obtained for the network model in which the windings
are lumped into R, L and C circuit components. The windings are represented by
as many elements as there are disks or groups of disks with the corresponding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

305

resistances, inductances (self and mutual) and capacitances (series and ground).
Thus, the equivalent lumped parameter network is a series of p circuits with
mutual magnetic couplings. In such a simplified model, although an individual
turn voltage cannot be ascertained, disk voltages can be determined which can be
used to decide the internal insulation between disks in the winding. Actually, the
voltage stresses are the result of electric and magnetic fields which appear in the
winding under surge conditions and are function of location and time. By
representing the transformer winding as a network of elements, the field problem
is effectively converted into a circuit problem.
An equivalent network for a multi-winding transformer has been reported in
[19] in which the conventional ladder network used for a single winding
consisting of lumped elements (self and mutual inductances, series and ground
capacitances) is extended for multiple windings. The method takes into account
the electrostatic and electromagnetic combinations of windings and therefore
permits the analysis of not only the voltage response of the winding to which the
impulse is applied but also the transferred voltage to other windings to which the
impulse is not directly applied. It is very important to calculate the transferred
voltages to other windings in the case of HV winding with the center-line lead
arrangement. With both the ends of LV winding grounded, voltage at the center
height (mid-height position) of LV winding could be oscillating and the net
voltage difference between LV and HV windings at the center height could be
more than the applied impulse magnitude. In such a case, the gap between LV and
HV windings may get decided by the extra higher voltage stress. A transferred
surge in two-winding transformers has four components, viz. the electrostatic
component decided by the network- of capacitances, the electromagnetic
component due to mutual inductances between windings, free oscillations of the
secondary winding, and forced oscillations of the secondary winding induced by
the free oscillations of the primary winding. For the free oscillations of the
secondary winding, the transferred electrostatic component represents the initial
distribution and the electromagnetic component represents the final distribution.
These four components are also present at the terminals of secondary and tertiary
windings when the primary winding is subjected to the impulse condition in a
three-winding transformer. In [38,39], surge transfers in three-winding
transformers have been analyzed in detail. It is shown that the third and fourth
components are usually insignificant and their effect is not important. The
electrostatic component can be reduced to a great extent if the secondary/tertiary
winding terminals are connected to an equipment (like a cable of sufficient length)
having a high capacitance to ground. Even the bushing and terminal bus
capacitances have the effect of reducing the transferred electrostatic component.
Simple formulae are given in [40] for calculation of transferred surge voltages in
autotransformers.
In the initial works, damping of oscillations caused by core loss, copper loss
and dielectric loss was generally not taken into account for simplifying the
calculations. Subsequently, the effects of these losses were taken into account by

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

306

Chapter 7

shunt elements representing a conductance between each winding node to ground
in the equivalent network [23]. In other words, the parameters such as winding
resistances were not considered separately since their effect on damping was
approximately taken into consideration by the shunt conductance elements. In
case of distribution transformers, winding resistances significantly reduce the
voltage peaks and hence they cannot be neglected. Due to availability of powerful
computational facilities, complex models can be solved now. A detailed model of
losses is incorporated in [37] for accurate calculations.
A method based on natural frequencies of windings is described in [41] for the
calculation of impulse voltage distribution. A mathematical model representing
capacitances and inductances of windings is analyzed to calculate eigenvalues and
eigenvectors, based on which the temporal and spatial variations of the voltage in
the windings are calculated.
Study of the effect of iron core on the impulse response of windings has been
studied in [19]. The effect of core on the lightning impulse response of a single
winding is significant for the case of ungrounded neutral as compared to the
grounded one. It seems to indicate that there exists flux in the core when the
neutral is not grounded. It has been also reported that with the inner non-impulsed
winding short-circuited, the presence of core has negligible effect on the voltage
response irrespective of the neutral grounding condition (of the impulsed
winding). The main flux in the core will be cancelled by the flux produced by the
inner short-circuited winding and only leakage flux contributes to the impulse
response. When the winding connections/grounding conditions allow the flux to
flow in the core, the iron losses in the core have a damping effect on the peaks of
voltage response, and in this case voltages are lower in presence of core as
compared to that with its absence. It has been reported in [42] that a considerable
variation in core permeability gives a very moderate change in the voltage
response. Hence, for finding impulse response of the winding, air core (self and
mutual) inductances (which can be easily calculated as explained in Section 7.4)
are generally used and suitable correction factors based on the experience/
experimental measurements are applied.
In [43], a study of the behavior of transformer winding subjected to standard
impulse voltage waves chopped at different instants (on the front as well as on the
tail of the waves) is presented. It is well-known that a wave chopped at an
unfavorable instant may result into higher voltage stresses at line end sections of
the winding as compared to voltage stresses due to a full wave of the same
steepness. The instant of switching and time to collapse of a chopped impulse
predominantly decide the level of stresses.

7.7 Computation of Impulse Voltage Distribution Using
State Variable Method
Accurate determination of impulse voltage distribution in a transformer winding
is possible by using its equivalent circuit as explained in the previous section.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

307

Figure 7.17 Equivalent circuit of a transformer winding

The evolution of the simplified equivalent network shown in figure 7.17 is
explained in [44]. In this section, a method is elaborated for finding impulse
distribution within a single winding, which can be easily extended for a case of
multiple windings. The equivalent circuit of a transformer winding consists of a
finite number of sections having elements C0, C1, Lii, Lij and G which are the shunt
capacitance, series capacitance, self inductance, mutual inductance and shunt
conductance respectively.
Due to the advancements in the computational facilities, it is quite simple to
calculate the impulse voltage distribution using the state space model of the
lumped parameter network of the transformer winding.
7.7.1 Derivation of differential equations
The network equations for the circuit are formulated in the nodal form as [34]
(7.75)
where C=nodal capacitance matrix with the inclusion of input node
G=nodal conductance matrix with the inclusion of input node
=nodal matrix of inverse inductances with the inclusion of input node
y(t)=output vector of node voltages with the inclusion of input node
The relationship between the nodal matrices and branch matrices is defined by

(7.76)

where Qc, QG and QL are the incidence matrices for capacitive, conductive and
inductive elements, and Cb, Gb and Lb are the branch matrices of capacitive,
conductive and inductive elements of the network respectively.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

308

Chapter 7

Figure 7.18 Numbering of capacitive branches

The number of equations is reduced by extracting the input node k because its
voltage is known. Therefore, equation 7.75 can be rewritten as
(7.77)
where, C=nodal capacitance matrix without the input node
G=nodal conductance matrix without the input node
G=nodal matrix of inverse inductances without the input node
y(t)=output vector of node voltages without the input node
x(t)=known voltage of the input node
Ck, Gk, Gk=kth column of C, G, with the entry of Kth row removed
7.7.2 Formation of

matrix

There are 2n capacitivc branches in the network of figure 7.17. Therefore, the size
of the branch capacitance matrix (Cb) is 2n×2n. For the branches of the circuit
numbered as shown in figure 7.18 it can be written as

(7.78)

The corresponding incidence matrix Qc(n×2n) is

(7.79)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

309

Figure 7.19 Numbering of conductive branches

We can get

from equation 7.76,
(7.80)

7.7.3 Formation of G matrix
Similarly, the branch conductance matrix (Gb) and incidence conductance matrix
QG of the order (n×n) for figure 7.19 can be given as

(7.81)

(7.82)

and
(7.83)

7.7.4 Formation of

matrix

Similarly, the branch inductance matrix (Lb) and incidence inductance matrix QL
of the order (n×n) for figure 7.20 can be given as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

310

Chapter 7

Figure 7.20 Numbering of inductive branches

(7.84)

(7.85)

(7.86)

and
(7.87)
7.7.5 State space model
The state space model of the differential equation 7.77 (without input node) is
(7.88)
y(t)=FX(t)+Dv(t)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

(7.89)

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

311

where X(t)=vector of state variables
A, F=matrices of constant coefficients
B, D=column matrices of constant coefficients
v(t)=input vector of applied impulse voltage
y(t)=output vector of node voltages
The equation 7.77 can be rewritten as

(7.90)
To get equation 7.90 in the desired form of state space equations, the state
variables can be chosen as
X1(t)=y(t)-β0x(t)

(7.91)
(7.92)

where

β0=-C-1Ck
β1=-C-1(Gk-GC-1Ck)

Now, rearranging equation 7.92 we get
(7.93)
Replacing y(t) and in equation 7.90 by their values from equations 7.91 and 7.92
respectively and simplifying we get
(7.94)
where

α2=C-1Γ, α1=C-1G,
β2=-C-1(Γk-GC-1(Gk-GC-1Ck)-ΓC-1Ck)

Also, rearranging equation 7.91 we have
y(t)=X1(t)+β0x(t)

(7.95)

Equations 7.93, 7.94 and 7.95 can be written in the matrix form as
(7.96)

(7.97)
Comparing equations 7.96 and 7.97 with equations 7.88 and 7.89 we get

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

312

Chapter 7

The above analysis has converted the original 2nd order circuit equation 7.77 to nd
an equivalent 1st order state space system (equations 7.96 and 7.97). The solution
of these state space equations can be written as [45]
(7.98)
where X(0-) is the state vector at t=0- and is assumed to be zero. The above
expression of X(t) can be evaluated analytically for simple x(τ). Alternatively, a
standard built-in function in MATLAB® for 1st order system can now be used to
solve equations 7.96 and 7.97.
After getting the value of the state variables (X) of the circuit, the node voltages
can be obtained from the equation 7.97. For the sample system given in [35], the
impulse response is calculated by the above method. The winding consists of 12
sections; the details of lumped elements are given in table 7.2.
The input voltage is assumed to be the standard full wave defined by
x(t)=x0(e-βt-e-δt)

(7.99)

For the standard (1/50) microsecond wave (which rises to its maximum value at 1
microsecond and decays to half the maximum value in 50 microseconds), when/is
expressed in microseconds the values of the constants are
x0=1.0167, β=0.01423 and δ=6.0691
The voltages calculated for various nodes are plotted in figure 7.21, which are in
close agreement with that reported in [35].
Table 7.2 Inductance and capacitance parameters [35]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

313

Figure 7.21 Voltage waveforms at all 12 nodes

The results obtained for another 10-section winding are also in close agreement
with that given in [46] calculated for rectangular and chopped waves.
The voltages are also calculated using two software packages SPICE and
SEQUEL. SPICE is a general-purpose circuit simulation program for nonlinear
DC, nonlinear transient and linear AC analyses developed by University of
Berkeley, California (http://bwrc.eecs.berkeley.edu/Classes/IcBook/SPICE/).
SEQUEL is a public-domain package (a Solver for circuit EQuations with
User-defined ELements), developed at IIT Bombay (see the details at http://
www.ee.iitb.ac.in/~microel/faculty/mbp/sequell.html). It allows the user to
incorporate new elements in the package by simply writing a “template” to
describe the model equations. SEQUEL is based on the Sparse Tableau approach,
in which all variables are treated in the same manner without separating them into
“current-like” and “voltage-like” variables. This makes it particularly convenient
to write new element templates. It solves a (generally nonlinear) system of
equations of the form,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

314

Chapter 7

Figure 7.22 Comparison of voltage waveform at node 6 obtained using different methods

fi=(x1, x2, x3,…, xn)=gi

(7.100)

where gi=0 or gi=dxj/dt. The method employed by SEQUEL to solve the nonlinear
equations is the well-known Newton-Raphson (NR) iterative method. Four
discretization schemes are offered for transient simulation: (i) Backward Euler,
(ii) Trapezoidal, (iii) Gear’s scheme (order 2) and (iv) TR-BDF2 scheme.
The results of all 3 methods (state variable method, SEQUEL and SPICE),
shown in figure 7.22 for node 6 of the winding with 12 sections, closely agree with
each other. The state variable method can be easily extended for multi-winding
transformers. The matrices in equation 7.77 will get changed and the same
procedure can be followed to get the impulse response.

7.8 Winding Design for Reducing Internal Overvoltages
7.8.1 Part winding resonance
Part winding resonance has been identified as the source of number of high
voltage power transformer failures. If the frequency of an exciting oscillating
voltage coincides with one of the fundamental natural frequencies of a winding or
a part of winding, resonant overvoltages will occur. The failures of four singlephase autotransformers in 500 kV and 765 kV systems of American Electric
Power between 1968 and 1971 led to the detailed investigations of winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

315

resonance phenomenon [47,48]. All these failures involved breakdown of offcircuit tap changers immediately after the occurrence of transmission system
faults. The taps were at the neutral end of the common winding in all the four
failed autotransformers. After the investigations, it was concluded that the
traveling wave generated by the line fault contributed to the failures. Factory and
field tests with nonstandard wave shapes and terminal conditions (simulating site
conditions) revealed that transient voltages could be generated across the taps
significantly in excess of those during the standard tests.
Because the tap changers are usually remote from the transformer line
terminals, high frequency components of the incoming surges will not ordinarily
find their way into the tap zone of the winding; instead the tap zone may
experience transient overvoltages associated with the lower frequencies of
winding resonance. It is also reported in [44,48] that the part winding fundamental
natural frequencies are proportional to the volt-ampere rating (per phase) raised to
a power substantially less than one and inversely proportional to the voltage rating
(phase value). Hence, as the voltage rating goes up in EHV transformers, natural
frequencies may become substantially lower (few kHz), thus increasing the
chances of part winding resonance.
Researchers have studied the generation of voltage transients in power
systems leading to a winding resonance and the factors that might mitigate the
phenomenon. The voltage transients are generated by switching operations of
lines or other equipment nearby in the network. Use of closing resistors or point
of wave switching during the switching operations may possibly mitigate the
effects. A transformer should be designed such that it is as far as possible selfprotecting against winding resonances. Some methods have been suggested to
protect transformers from failures due to part winding resonance phenomenon
involving tap windings [47,49], viz. connection of external arrester to winding,
use of shunt capacitors, and connection of nonlinear resistors in parallel with the
tap winding.
Natural frequencies of core type transformers normally lie between 5 kHz to
few hundred kHz, if one excludes the problem of very fast transients [50]. Values
of natural frequencies do not vary much for transformers supplied by different
manufacturers. There is always a chance that frequency of an external oscillating
disturbance is close to any of the natural frequencies of the winding. The winding
natural frequencies are determined by its parameters, and these cannot be changed
beyond certain limits. In certain cases, where exact natural frequencies of the
network can be determined (e.g., cable feeding transformer in a substation), it may
be possible to change the winding type to avoid the possibility of a transformer
natural frequency coming close to the external excitation frequency. However,
every effort should be made to avoid network conditions which tend to produce
oscillating voltages. If possible, parameters of the expected disturbances in the
network should be made known to the transformer designer since unlimited
requirements will make the transformer very costly. In this context, a closer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

316

Chapter 7

cooperation between the users and manufacturers of transformers is desirable.
The knowledge of precise transmission line propagation characteristics is
essential for determining the amplitude of incoming surges. Also, the terminal
conditions (loading, neutral grounding, etc.) of transformers have significant
impact on the resonance phenomenon.
The resonance basically is the excitation of an oscillation in a winding by an
external oscillating disturbance, both having frequencies very close to each other.
Analysis of the failure of a generator step-up transformer due to internal
resonance caused by an oscillating voltage excitation is reported in [51].
Oscillatory switching surges can be produced in a system by sudden voltage
changes (switching operations, short line faults, etc.) at some distance from the
transformer terminals. The natural frequency of the line is given by
(7.101)
where v is the wave propagation velocity (300 m/µs for overhead transmission
lines and 100 m/µs for cables) and L is length of line (distance of the transformer
from the location where a switching operation or ground fault occurs). If the
natural frequency of the line corresponds to the natural frequency of the
winding, high internal overvoltages may develop. Hence, after knowing the
dominant resonant frequency of the winding, the critical line length can be
calculated from equation 7.101, at which the placement of circuit breaker
should be avoided. It should be ensured as far as possible that a fault does not
occur at this location.
The resonant overvoltages are basically determined by the winding design
(arrangement and type of winding) and the damping (due to frequency dependent
effective winding resistance). The calculation of the effective frequency
dependent winding resistance, although quite laborious, is essential. Oscillations
are significantly affected by the internal damping (winding and core losses) and
external damping (line resistance); the amplitude of oscillations decreases with
the increase in damping.
Possibility of resonant conditions in the windings can be known from the
terminal and internal measurements. The resonances are of two types: terminal
resonance and internal resonance. For a complicated non-uniform winding, the
terminal response may not necessarily bear a direct relation to the internal
response of a particular part of the winding. In other words, a part winding
resonance may significantly influence transient oscillations of a major part of the
winding but its effects may not be observed in the terminal impedance plot.
Although it was known long ago that high frequency resonances exist within
the transformer windings, traditionally emphasis has been to check the response
of transformers to pulse (unidirectional) test voltages since the sources of steady
state high frequency excitation were not envisaged in the power system. Hence,
the standards have been based on pulse shapes thought to be reasonably

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

317

representing transient overvoltages in the system. Designers in earlier days
worried only about the standard voltage shapes and not about the calculation of
internal resonant frequencies which the nonstandard wave shapes may excite. The
pattern of oscillations in transformer windings is not very orderly due to nonuniformities in insulation and turn distributions. It is obvious that in order to check
the withstand capability against winding resonances, there is no point in
increasing power frequency test voltage as it will not lead to a local high stress
concentration in the winding. Also, it is observed in most of the cases that under
standard test conditions, the front of standard switching impulse waveform may
rise too slowly or the tail of standard lightning impulse waveform may fall too
rapidly to excite the internal part winding resonance as compared to the possibility
of such resonance in actual service with a lower magnitude of surge after the
occurrence of a line fault. Hence, the withstand can be possibly checked by
suitably modifying the impulse wave shape (front and tail). It has been reported in
[51] that certain aperiodic overvoltage wave shapes such as a fast-front long-tail
switching overvoltages can result into high internal voltage stresses in transformer
windings.
7.8.2 Natural frequencies of windings
For eliminating the possibility of resonance in windings, an accurate determination
of transformer’s frequency response characteristics is essential. These
characteristics can be determined by actual measurement which is the oldest and
reliable technique. Its disadvantage is that the response cannot be predicted at the
design stage and it is difficult to measure the internal winding response unless the
winding insulation is pierced and damaged for the use of conductively coupled
probes. Capacitively coupled non-destructive probes can be used after careful
scrutiny of their accuracy and precision. In [52], authors have used an equivalent
circuit of winding containing lumped inductances and capacitances for
determining natural frequencies. It is shown that the mutual inductances between
all sections of the winding must be taken into account to determine correctly the
natural frequencies. Subsequently, the method of equivalent circuit has been used
[53] for finding oscillations of coupled windings, in which the natural frequencies
are determined for a primary winding with secondary winding short-circuited.
The natural frequencies of three-phase transformer windings are calculated in
[54] to take into account the effects of the capacitive and inductive couplings
between the windings of different phases.
Another method is to use an electromagnetic model of the transformer [55], in
which a scaled model is used to determine the natural frequencies and the voltage
response; the obvious disadvantage being the high cost and time involved in
building a new scale model for each transformer of interest. Hence, the most
convenient and economical method is to determine the frequencies through
simulations by computers. A numerical method has been presented in [56] for
determining the terminal and internal impedance versus frequency characteristics

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

318

Chapter 7

for a general lumped parameter network, using which the resonant frequency
characteristics and amplification factors are calculated. If a transformer winding is
represented by a lumped parameter network, its response will be different than
that of the actual one. In practice, it is sufficient to choose the number of sections
in the winding representation somewhat larger than the number of required
resonant frequencies [52,56].
7.8.3 Graded capacitance winding
The development of interleaved windings is an important milestone in the history
of power transformers. Although the interleaving improves dramatically the
voltage distribution in the main winding, the tap (regulating) winding, if present,
may get subjected to very high local voltages due to the part winding resonance.
Thus, the improvement in surge voltage response obtained by interleaving may be
offset by the overvoltages on account of the part winding resonance. When the
main winding is fully interleaved, design of tap winding and tap changer becomes
critical in high voltage transformers since the voltage across the tap winding may
reach unacceptable levels. The surge performance of a power transformer having
taps on HV winding has been analyzed in [57] for two cases, viz. interleaved
winding and non-interleaved continuous disk winding. For the case of interleaved
winding, where both HV main winding and its corresponding tap winding are of
interleaved type, it is reported that the voltages (with respect to ground) of various
points in the HV main winding are almost linearly distributed along the length of
the winding indicating a marked improvement as compared to the non-interleaved
type. For both designs, the voltage across the tap winding is shown to have a
oscillatory behavior, but in the interleaved design there is no attenuation
suggesting a part winding resonance in the tap winding. The peak value of voltage
is practically limited by the winding resistance under the resonance conditions. It
has been proved that because of high series capacitance due to interleaving, the
resonant frequency of tap winding disks has reduced to a value of 22 kHz which is
close to the excitation frequency for the standard 1.2/50 microseconds impulse
wave (the impulse wave has a frequency of about 20 kHz when it reaches the tap
winding). The study reported suggests that in order to eliminate the possibility of
resonance conditions, resonant frequencies of different parts of the winding
should be determined at the design stage, and also the winding response for a
variety of input voltage waveforms (covering wide range of frequencies of
practical importance) should be studied.
Thus, interleaving may not always be the right solution for high voltage
windings and may lead to high voltages in some parts of the windings. Usually, it
is thought that in order to improve the voltage distribution, it is always better to
have the main winding as totally interleaved type. If the tap winding is of noninterleaved type, due to substantial increase of impedance (on account of less
series capacitance), the voltage across the tap winding is observed to be higher.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

319

Hence, a designer may think to make the tap winding also as interleaved, in which
case for specific winding parameters there is a possibility of a part winding
resonance as explained earlier. One of the better options can be the use of winding
with graded series capacitance. The series capacitance of the main winding can be
gradually reduced in 2 or 3 steps (by the change in degree of interleaving) and its
neutral end part (electrically adjacent to the tap winding) can be the continuous
disk winding. In this case, the tap winding can also be of continuous disk nature.
The part winding resonance phenomenon can be damped to a great extent by
using the graded interleaving technique in some typical designs. The graded
interleaving for a winding with two parallel conductors can be obtained by using
the conductor interleaving (figure 7.7) at line end and the turn interleaving (figure
7.6) for subsequent disks. In the case of turns with only one conductor,
interleaving schemes shown in figure 7.23 [58] and figure 7.24 [8] can be used.
The first type of interleaving, in which four disks are required to complete the
interleaving, results in a much higher capacitance as compared to that in figure 7.6
which is the two-disk interleaving method. Its capacitance can be easily calculated
by the method given in Section 7.3.5. The second type is one-disk interleaving
method, which results in less capacitance as compared to the two-disk
interleaving method.
Although the series capacitance increases with the degree of interleaving, a
marginal improvement in response may be achieved beyond a certain limit. Also
the winding process becomes more difficult; hence interleaving methods
involving more than four disks are rarely used in practice. The importance and
usefulness of graded capacitance (higher capacitance at the line end which is
reduced in steps towards the neutral end) in the case of interleaved windings and
shielded-conductor windings have been verified in [59]. It may be more
advantageous from the point of voltage distribution to have a graded series
capacitance rather than a high series capacitance throughout the winding.

Figure 7.23 Four-disk interleaving

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Figure 7.24 One-disk interleaving

320

Chapter 7

Figure 7.25 Tap winding with an open end

One useful arrangement could be two-disk interleaving at line end followed by
one-disk interleaving followed by continuous disk type with the neutral end tap
winding also as the continuous disk winding. The phenomenon of getting higher
voltages due to sudden impedance (capacitance) change can be mitigated by
means of a graded capacitance arrangement.
In the case of tap winding with a large tapping range, the problem of higher
stress is more severe at its open end during the impulse test condition wherein the
entire tap winding is out of circuit. The corresponding configuration and the
typical voltage distribution are shown in figure 7.25. The large difference between
the initial and final voltage distributions at the open end is responsible for large
voltage oscillations. The types of HV main winding and tap winding can be
judiciously selected to avoid a high voltage buildup in the tap winding as
explained earlier. A reverse graded interleaving method is proposed in [60] to
reduce the voltage buildup, in which the degree of interleaving is reduced from the
line end to the tap end for the main winding, whereas for the tap winding it is
increased from the main winding end to the open end. The increase of series
capacitance at the open end reduces substantially the voltage stresses there.
7.8.4 Location of windings
The transient voltages appearing across the tap winding depend up on its design
and position with respect to the main winding. One of the effective ways of
reducing the high impulse voltages across the tap winding or between the tap
winding and ground, is to have the tap winding located between the core and LV
winding. The inner tap winding is usually of an interleaved type (as described in
Section 7.3.8) having a high series capacitance reducing the impulse voltage
across it.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

321

Figure 7.26 Effect of tap winding location in autotransformers

In autotransformers, if the tap winding is kept between HV (series) and IV
(common) windings as shown in figure 7.26, the tap winding (with taps at the line
end of IV winding) acts as a shield for IV winding and improves the voltage
distribution significantly at the line end of IV winding (during the impulse test on
IV winding). However, insulation of neutral end disks of IV winding may have to
be strengthened (by special insulation components) since these face the tap
winding which is at much higher potential.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

Blume, L.F. and Boyajian, A. Abnormal voltages within transformers, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 38, February 1919, pp. 577–614.
Thomas, H.L. Insulation stresses in transformers with special reference to
surges and electrostatic shielding, Journal IEE, Vol. 84, 1940, pp. 427–443.
Norris, E.T. The lightning strength of power transformers, Journal IEE, Vol.
95, Pt. II, 1948, pp. 389–406.
Heller, B. and Veverka, A. Surge phenomena in electrical machines, Iliffe
Books Ltd., London, 1968.
Chadwik, A.T., Ferguson, J.M., Ryder, D.H., and Stearn, G.F. Design of power
transformers to withstand surges due to lightning, with special reference to a
new type of winding, Proceedings IEE, Pt. II, Vol. 97, 1950, pp. 737–750.
Grimmer, E.J. and Teague, W.L. Improved core form transformer winding,
AIEE Transactions, Vol. 70, 1951, pp. 962–967.
Pedersen, A. On the response of interleaved transformer windings to surge
voltages, AIEE Transactions, Vol. 82, June 1963, pp. 349–356.
Van Nuys, R. Interleaved high-voltage transformer windings, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-97, No. 5, September/
October 1978, pp. 1946–1954.
Teranishi, T., Ikeda, M., Honda, M., and Yanari, T. Local voltage oscillation in
interleaved transformer windings, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-100, No. 2, 1981, pp. 873–881.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

322

Chapter 7

10. Jayaram, B.N. The series capacitance of transformer windings, Electrotechnics,
Indian Institute of Science, No. 28, 1961, pp. 69–87.
11. Jayaram, B.N. The equivalent series capacitance of a single disk-coil in a
transformer winding, (in German), Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift—A, Vol. 94,
1973, pp. 547–548.
12. Kawaguchi, Y. Calculation of circuit constants for computing internal
oscillating voltage in transformer windings, Electrical Engineering in Japan,
Vol. 89, No. 3, 1969, pp. 44–53.
13. Jayaram, B.N. Determination of impulse distribution in transformers with a
digital computer, (in German), Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift—A, Vol. 82,
January 1961, pp. 1–9.
14. Karsai, K., Kerenyi, D., and Kiss, L. Large power transformers, Elsevier
Publication, Amsterdam, 1987.
15. Del Vecchio, R.M., Poulin, B., and Ahuja, R. Calculation and measurement of
winding disk capacitances with wound-in-shields, IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Vol. 13, No. 2, April 1998, pp. 503–509.
16. Chowdhuri, P. Calculation of series capacitance for transient analysis of
windings, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-2, No. 1, January
l987, pp. 133–139.
17. Weed, J.M. Prevention of transient voltage in windings, AIEE Transactions,
February 1922, pp. 149–159.
18. Wilcox, D.J., Hurley, W.G., and Conlon, M. Calculation of self and mutual
impedances between sections of transformer windings, Proceedings IEE, Vol.
136, Pt. C, No. 5, September 1989, pp. 308–314.
19. Miki, A., Hosoya, T., and Okuyama, K. A calculation method for impulse
voltage distribution and transferred voltage in transformer windings, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-97, No. 3, May/
June 1978, pp. 930- 939.
20. Grover, F.W. Inductance calculations: Working formulae and tables, Van
Nostrand Company, Inc., 1947.
21. Wirgau, K.A. Inductance calculation of an air-core disk winding, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-95, No. 1, January/
February 1976, pp. 394–400.
22. Okuyama, K. A numerical analysis of impulse voltage distribution in
transformer windings, Electrical Engineering in Japan, Vol. 87, 1967, pp.
80–88.
23. Krondl, M. and Schleich, A. Predetermination of the transient voltages in
transformers subject to impulse voltage, Bulletin Oerlikon, No. 342/343,
December 1960, pp. 114–133.
24. McWhirter, J.H., Fahrnkopf, C.D., and Steele, J.H. Determination of impulse
stresses within transformer windings by computers, AIEE Transactions, Vol.
75, Pt. III, February 1957, pp. 1267–1279.
25. Honorati, O. and Santini, E. New approach to the analysis of impulse voltage

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

323

distribution in transformer windings, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 137, Pt. C, No. 4,
July 1990, pp. 283–289.
26. Rudenberg, R. Performance of traveling waves in coils and windings, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 59, 1940, pp. 1031–1040.
27. Bewley, L.V. Traveling waves on transmission lines, John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., New York, 1951.
28. Allibone, T.E., McKenzie, D.B., and Perry, F.R. The effects of impulse voltages
on transformer windings, Journal IEE, Vol. 80, No. 482, February l937, pp.
117–173.
29. Abetti, P.A. and Maginniss, F.J. Fundamental oscillations of coils and windings,
AIEE Transactions, February 1954, pp. 1–10.
30. Rudenberg, R. Surge characteristics of two-winding transformers, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 60, 1941, pp. 1136–1144.
31. Glaninger, P. Modal analysis as a means of explaining the oscillatory behavior
of transformers, Brown Boveri Review, 1–86, pp. 41–49.
32. Abetti, P.A. Correlation of forced and free oscillations of coils and windings,
AIEE Transactions, December 1959, pp. 986–996.
33. Lewis, T.J. The transient behavior of ladder networks of the type representing
transformer and machine windings, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 101, Pt. II, 1954,
pp. 541–553.
34. Fergestad, P.I. and Henriksen, T. Transient oscillations in multi-winding
transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol PAS93, 1974, pp. 500–509.
35. Kasturi, R. and Murty, G.R. K. Computation of impulse voltage stresses in
transformer windings, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 126, No. 5, May 1979, pp. 397–
400.
36. Carlin, H.J. and Giordano, A.B. Network theory, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1964.
37. De Leon, F. and Semlyen, A. Complete transformer model for electromagnetic
transients, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 9, No. 1, January 1994,
pp. 231–239.
38. Abetti, P.A. Electrostatic voltage distribution and transfer in three-winding
transformers, AIEE Transactions, December 1954, pp. 1407–1416.
39. Abetti, P.A. and Davis, H.F. Surge transfer in three-winding transformers,
AIEE Transactions, December 1954, pp. 1395–1407.
40. Koppikar, D.A. and Vijayan, K. Transferred surge voltage in transformers,
International Conference on Transformers, TRAFOTECH—94, Bangalore,
January 1994, pp. 121–124.
41. Gupta, S.C. and Singh, B.P. Determination of the impulse voltage distribution
in windings of large power transformers, Electric Power Systems Research,
Vol. 25, 1992, pp. 183–189.
42. Fergestad, P.I. and Henriksen, T. Inductances for the calculation of transient
oscillation in transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. PAS-93, 1974, pp. 510–517.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

324

Chapter 7

43. Munshi, S., Roy, C.K., and Biswas, J.R. Computer studies of the performance
of transformer windings against chopped impulse voltages, Proceedings IEE,
Vol. 139, Pt. C, No. 3, May 1992, pp. 286–294.
44. McNutt, W.J., Blalock, T.J., and Hinton, R.A. Response of transformer
windings to system transient voltages, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-93, March/April 1974, pp. 457–466.
45. Phillips, C.L. and Harbor, R.D. Feedback control systems, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1996.
46. Waldvogel, P. and Rouxel, R. A new method of calculating the electric stresses
in a winding subjected to a surge voltage, The Brown Boveri Review, Vol. 43,
No. 6, June 1956, pp. 206–213.
47. Margolis, H.B., Phelps, J.D. M., Carlomagno, A.A., and McElroy, A.J.
Experience with part-winding resonance in EHV auto-transformers: diagnosis
and corrective measures, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems,
Vol. PAS-94, No. 4, July/August 1975, pp. 1294–1300.
48. McElroy, A.J. On the significance of recent EHV transformer failures involving
winding resonance, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol.
PAS-94, No. 4, July/August 1975, pp. 1301–1307.
49. Teranishi, T., Ebisawa, Y., Yanari, T., and Honda, M. An approach to suppressing
resonance voltage in transformer tap windings, IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-102, No. 8, August 1983, pp. 2552–2558.
50. Preininger, G. Resonant overvoltages and their impact on transformer design,
protection and operation, International Summer School on Transformers,
ISST’93, Technical University of Lodz, Poland, 1993, Paper No. 11.
51. Musil, R.J., Preininger, G., Schopper, E., and Wenger, S. Voltage stresses
produced by aperiodic and oscillating system overvoltages in transformer
windings, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS100, No. 1, January 1981, pp. 431–441.
52. Abetti, P.A. and Maginniss, F.J. Natural frequencies of coils and windings
determined by equivalent circuit, AIEE Transactions, June 1953, pp. 495–
503.
53. Abetti, P.A., Adams, G.E., and Maginniss, F.J. Oscillations of coupled
windings, AIEE Transactions, April 1955, pp. 12–21.
54. Gururaj, B.I. Natural frequencies of 3-phase transformer windings, AIEE
Transactions, June 1963, pp. 318–329.
55. Abetti, P.A. Transformer models for determination of transient voltages, AIEE
Transactions, June 1953, pp. 468–480.
56. Degeneff, R.C. A general method for determining resonances in transformer
windings, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-96,
No. 2, March/April 1977, pp. 423–430.
57. De, A. and Chatterjee, N. Part winding resonance: demerit of interleaved highvoltage transformer winding, Proceedings IEE—Electric Power Applications,
Vol. 147, No. 3, May 2000, pp. 167–174.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Surge Phenomena in Transformers

325

58. Schleich, A. Behaviour of partially interleaved transformer windings subjected
to impulse voltages, Bulletin Oerlikon, No. 389/390, pp. 41–52.
59. Okuyama, K. Effect of series capacitance on impulse voltage distribution in
transformer windings, Electrical Engineering in Japan, Vol. 87, 1967, pp.
27–34.
60. De, A. and Chatterjee, N. Graded interleaving of EHV transformers for
optimum surge performance, International Symposium on High Voltage
Engineering, ISH-2001, Bangalore, Paper No. 6–30, pp. 916–919.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

8
Insulation Design

Insulation design is one of the most important aspects of the transformer design. It
is the heart of transformer design, particularly in high voltage transformers. Sound
design practices, use of appropriate insulating materials, controlled
manufacturing processes and good house-keeping ensure quality and reliability
of transformers. Comprehensive verification of insulation design is essential for
enhancing reliability as well as for material cost optimization.
With the steady increase in transmission system voltages, the voltage ratings
of power transformers have also increased making insulation content a
significant portion of the transformer cost. Also, insulation space influences the
cost of active parts like core and copper, as well as the quantity of oil in the
transformer, and hence has a great significance in the transformer design.
Moreover, it is also environmentally important that we optimize the transformer
insulation which is primarily made out of wood products. In addition, with the
associated increase in MVA ratings, the weight and size of large transformers
approach or exceed transport limits. These reasons together with the everincreasing competition in the global market are responsible for continuous
efforts to reduce insulation content in transformers. In other words, margin
between withstand levels and operating stress levels is reducing. This requires
greater efforts from researchers and designers for accurate calculation of stress
levels at various critical electrode configurations inside the transformer under
different test voltage levels and different test connections. Advanced
computational tools (e.g., FEM) are being used for accurate calculation of stress
levels. These stress levels are compared with withstand levels which are
established based on experimental/published data.
For the best dielectric performance, reduction in maximum electric stress in
insulation is usually not enough; the following factors affecting the withstand
327
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

328

Chapter 8

characteristics should be given due consideration, viz. waveform of applied
voltage and corresponding response, volt-time characteristics of insulation, shape
and surface condition of electrodes, partial discharge inception characteristics of
insulation, types of insulating mediums, amount of stressed volume, etc.
Minimization of non-uniform dielectric fields, avoiding creepage stress,
improvement in oil processing and impregnation, elimination of voids,
elimination of local high stresses due to winding connections/crossovers/
transpositions, are some of the important steps in the insulation design of
transformers. Strict control of manufacturing processes is also important.
Manufacturing variations of insulating components should be monitored and
controlled. Proper acceptance norms and criteria have to be established by the
manufacturers for the insulation processing carried out before high voltage tests.
The transformer insulation system can be categorized into major insulation
and minor insulation. The major insulation consists of insulation between
windings, between windings and limb/yoke, and between high voltage leads and
ground. The minor insulation consists of basically internal insulation within the
windings, viz. inter-turn and inter-disk insulation. The chapter gives in details the
methodology of design of the major and minor insulations in transformers.
Various methods for field computations are described. The factors affecting the
insulation strength are discussed. In transformers with oil-solid composite
insulation system, two kinds of failures usually occur. The first kind involves a
complete failure between two electrodes (which can be jump/bulk-oil breakdown,
creepage breakdown along oil-solid interface or combination of both). The
second one is a local oil failure (partial discharge), which may not immediately
lead to failure between two electrodes. Sustained partial discharges lead to
deterioration of the insulation system eventually leading to a failure. The chapter
discusses these failures and countermeasures to avoid them. It also covers various
kinds of test levels and method of conversion of these to an equivalent Design
Insulation Level (DIL) which can be used to design major and minor insulation
systems. Statistical methods for optimization and reliability enhancement are also
introduced.

8.1 Calculation of Stresses for Simple Configurations
For uniform fields in a single dielectric material between bare electrodes, the
electric stress (field strength) is given by the voltage difference between the
electrodes divided by the distance between them,
(8.1)
The above equation is applicable to, for example, a parallel plate capacitor with
one dielectric.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

329

Figure 8.1 Multi-dielectric configuration

For non-uniform fields (e.g., cylindrical conductor—plane configuration), the
stress (Enu) is more at the conductor surface; the increase in stress value as
compared to that under the uniform field condition is characterized by a nonuniformity factor (η),
(8.2)
The non-uniformity factor is mainly a function of electrode configuration.
For a multi-dielectric case between two parallel plates shown in figure 8.1, the
stress in any dielectric for a potential difference of V between the plates is

(8.3)
where ε i is relative permittivity of i th dielectric. This expression for the
configuration of parallel plates can be derived by using the fact that the stress is
inversely proportional to permittivity. The stress value is constant within any
dielectric.
For two concentric cylindrical electrodes of radii r1 and r2, with a single
dielectric between them as shown in figure 8.2, the stress in the dielectric is not
constant and varies with radius. The stress at any radius r(r1<r<r2) is

Figure 8.2 Concentric cylindrical electrodes

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

330

Chapter 8

Figure 8.3 Concentric cylindrical electrodes with multiple dielectrics

(8.4)
and the maximum stress occurs at the inner electrode surface given by

(8.5)
For the multi-dielectric case shown in figure 8.3, the stress at any radius r is

(8.6)

For the cylindrical conductor—plane configuration (figure 8.4), formulae for
stresses at the conductor surface and plane are derived in appendix B. The
maximum stress on the conductor surface occurs at point P (along the shortest
distance between the two electrodes) which is given by the expression (equation
B14 of appendix B),

Figure 8.4 Cylindrical conductor—plane configuration

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

331

Figure 8.5 Stress between two bare cylindrical conductors

(8.7)

and the maximum stress at the plane occurs at point G, which is given by the
expression (equation B19),

(8.8)
In the previous two equations, the factor multiplying the term (V/(s-R)) is nonuniformity factor. For calculation of stress at any other point along the shortest
distance, equation B22 can be used.
For the configuration of two bare cylindrical conductors shown in figure 8.5
with a potential difference V between them, the maximum electric stress occurring
at points P and Q is given as (from equations B12 and B13)

The above equation is applicable when the electrostatic field between the two
conductors is not influenced by any other boundary condition (the case of two
isolated conductors).
Thus, for bare leads of equal radii, the configuration is equivalent to
considering a potential difference of (V/2) applied between one conductor and
plane at a distance of s from the conductor center (cylindrical conductor—plane
configuration of figure 8.4).
For the configuration of paper insulated cylindrical conductor (e.g., insulated
high voltage lead in the transformer) and plane shown in figure 8.6, the maximum
stress in oil at the surface of the covered conductor (at point A) is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

332

Chapter 8

Figure 8.6 Stress between insulated lead and ground

(8.10)
Similarly, the maximum stress in the paper insulation at the conductor surface (at
point B) is given by the expression,

(8.11)
At any other point in this geometry and for more complicated electrode
configurations, analytical or numerical techniques should be used for accurate
field computations as described in the next section.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

333

8.2 Field Computations
8.2.1 Analytical methods
For estimating electric stress levels at various critical electrodes, it is necessary to
find electrostatic field distribution. The field distribution can be found by a
variety of methods. Classical methods such as method of images give quite
accurate results whenever they can be applied. For complex configurations, which
exist inside a transformer, these methods cannot be applied. Initially, transformer
designers had to depend on analog methods in which conducting paper and
electrolytic tank analogs were used [1]. Before the advent of computers and
numerical methods, these methods were widely used for multi-electrode and
multi-dielectric material systems of transformers with two-dimensional
approximations of the problem. Stressed oil volume, required for estimation of
strength, was also calculated by direct plotting of equigradient lines on a
conducting paper analog by using suitable instrumentation [2]. Analog methods
are inconvenient, inaccurate, expensive, and are limited in their application. They
may not be relevant now due to the rapid development of computational
techniques.
A conformal mapping technique such as the Schwarz-Christoffel
transformation has also been widely used for relatively simple geometries within
the transformers [3,4]. In this method, the whole region of interest is mapped into
a new plane in which the solution is constructed involving unknown constants in
the transformation equation. The unknown constants are calculated by solving a
set of nonlinear equations which describe the boundaries of the region in the
original plane. Curved boundaries can also be handled in this method. Although
the method is suitable for regions with a single dielectric material, for multidielectric problems an approximate solution can be obtained by converting them
into a single dielectric region by using equivalent insulation distances. The
method is best suited for a simply connected region containing few electrodes. For
multiple connected regions with complicated electrode shapes and multiple
dielectrics, this method is not suitable.
8.2.2 Numerical methods
In many cases, physical systems are so complex that analytical solutions are
difficult or impossible, and hence numerical methods are commonly used for field
computations. A numerical technique, Finite Difference Method (FDM), is used in
[5,6] for the field computations. It results into a set of linear equations which are
solved by direct matrix methods or iterative methods. FDM gives accurate results
and can handle curved boundaries accurately if large number of points (fine grid)
is taken on the boundary. Its main disadvantage is that the solution (potential
distribution) is available at discrete points only, and hence the method presents
some difficulties where quantities like stressed areas/volumes are required to be
calculated [7].

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

334

Chapter 8

One of the most powerful and popular numerical techniques these days is FEM.
It is in use for electrostatic field computations since the last three decades [8].
Usefulness of the method has already been demonstrated for magnetostatic and
eddy current problems in the earlier chapters. At locations where the field is
changing sharply, higher order polynomials can be used to approximate the
potential distribution within the corresponding elements and/or fine mesh can be
used. As the method yields a set of linear equations, solution can be obtained by
direct matrix methods or iterative methods. The electric stress in any element is
calculated by differentiating the approximated polynomial function. The stressed
area between two equigradient lines can be derived by finding the elements in
which the stresses are within the two limits of stress values.
Many adopt charge simulation method (CSM) for electric field computations
because it can solve unbounded regions and has high accuracy [9]. In this method,
physically distributed charges on the conductor surface are replaced by discrete
fictitious line charges placed outside the space in which the field distribution is to
be computed. The magnitude of these fictitious charges is calculated in order that
their integrated effect satisfies the boundary conditions exactly, at some selected
number of points on the boundary. The method requires proper selection and
placement of a large number of charges for a good accuracy. For example, a
distributed charge on the surface of high voltage electrode can be replaced by k
line charges placed inside the electrode. For determining the magnitude of these
charges, k points are chosen on the surface of the electrode and the condition to be
satisfied is as follows. At each of these points on the electrode surface, the
potential resulting from the superposition of these fictitious charges should be
equal to the conductor electrode potential Vc,

(8.12)

where Pi is potential coefficient and Qi is discrete fictitious line charge. When the
above equation is applied to all the selected points k, we get a system of k linear
equations which are solved to get the magnitudes of k charges. The electric field
value at any point in the domain of interest can be determined easily by the
superposition method using these values of charges. Thus, although CSM has
distinct advantages of its applicability to unbounded regions and reasonable
computational efforts, it is not well suited for complex electrode configurations
with a number of dielectric materials. On the contrary, FEM is most suitable for
complex problems but for bounded regions. For electrodes with very small radius,
because of the limitation on the smallest size of element that can be used and the
approximation of curved path by small line segments, the accuracy of FEM may
not be the best. Hence, advantages of CSM and FEM can be combined with
elimination of their disadvantages in the combination method as reported in [10].
In this method, the entire problem space is divided into two parts; CSM is used

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

335

mainly for the open space with infinite boundary and FEM is used for the finite
enclosed space.

8.3 Factors Affecting Insulation Strength
The breakdown voltage of a dielectric material is a statistically distributed
quantity which is a function of its physical/chemical properties and impurities
present in it. Failures may not be always initiated by higher electrical stresses;
interrelated thermal, chemical and mechanical factors may also have significant
influence on the breakdown processes. As compared to metals, insulating
materials exhibit an erratic behavior. With the ageing and/or deterioration of
electrical and mechanical properties, it becomes even more difficult to predict
their performance. In transformers, composite oil-solid insulation system is used.
The erratic behavior of transformer oil is pronounced when used alone. There is a
much larger scatter of breakdown voltage for oil as compared to a smaller scatter
observed for air. The very large scatter of the oil gap breakdown voltage may be
associated with the random path of streamers and variations in their progress in the
oil [11]. Hence, larger oil ducts are always subdivided by solid insulation into
smaller ducts due to which the transformer insulation system becomes more
dependable and stable.
Compared with breakdown processes in gases, little is known about the
processes which initiate and lead to breakdowns in the oil. General models using
micro-bubble and weak-link theory have been attempted. It is reported in the
literature that some micro-bubbles exist m the oil even in the absence of electric
field, and the application of field creates additional bubbles. It is suggested that
discharges are ignited in these micro-bubbles. Due to dielectrophoretic forces,
particles/impurities are swept from surrounding oil regions to the points of
highest stress in the oil gap [12]. These particles then tend to line up along the
electric field lines to create a weak-link in the oil gap; this phenomenon is
accentuated in the presence of moisture. Transformer designers use to a great
extent semi-empirical data for the insulation design as there is still no coherent
theory of oil breakdown.
8.3.1 Effect of moisture and impurities
Needless to say, moisture and other impurities have significant deteriorating
effect on the dielectric strength of the transformer insulation. The moisture has
deteriorating effect on both electrical and mechanical properties of the insulation.
As the moisture content in oil increases, strength reduces drastically till the
saturation point, after which there is no appreciable further deterioration of the
strength. Hence, percentage saturation is the decisive factor influencing the
dielectric strength of the transformer oil [13,14]. The degrading effect of moisture
content is also significantly affected by the amount of other impurities present in
the oil [15]. The presence of solid impurities makes the deteriorating effect (of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

336

Chapter 8

moisture on strength) more significant even at quite low moisture content in the
oil. The solid insulation has more affinity (as compared to the oil) for moisture. It
has been reported in [16] that at room temperature, the reduction in dielectric
strength of the oil due to presence of cellulose particles gets amplified at higher
moisture content.
An increase of pressure or temperature, increases the quantity of gas the oil can
hold. If the oil temperature rises owing to increase of ambient temperature or load,
the oil expands and the pressure increases. When the pressure falls, the oil has
more gas content than it can hold. The excess gases eventually diffuse out of the
oil after some time (few days or weeks) depending on the ratio of the oil surface
exposed to gas and the total oil volume. If the pressure drops suddenly the gas
bubbles may get formed in the oil, reducing the dielectric strength [15].
The dielectric strength of paper insulation is significantly decided by its
mechanical properties. A brittle paper having lost mechanical strength has a low
dielectric strength. Ageing of insulation affects its mechanical strength more
significantly than the electrical strength [15]. The rate of ageing increases rapidly
with the increase in temperature deteriorating mechanical properties.
A number of studies have been reported in the literature [13,16–19]
highlighting effects of various influencing factors, viz. temperature, pressure,
impurities, moisture, electrode shape/surface, electrode metal, applied voltage
and its duration, gap between electrodes, etc., on the oil breakdown strength.
8.3.2 Effect of time and frequency
Volt-time characteristics are specific curves representing the relationship between
voltage and time to breakdown. These characteristics generally follow a law that
some amount of energy is required to cause breakdown of a gap, and thus the
breakdown voltage and time are interdependent [20]. The higher the voltage the
lower the time is to cause the breakdown. A typical volt-time curve of air
insulation is shown in figure 8.7.

Figure 8.7 Typical volt-time curve

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

337

In short-time power frequency overvoltage tests, the breakdown strength of the
solid insulation is influenced by temperature rise. When an alternating voltage is
applied, initially the heat on account of dielectric losses is stored inside the
insulation and temperature begins to rise. The heat is dissipated to surrounding
ambient which is at a lower temperature than the insulation. The insulation
temperature continues to rise until a state of equilibrium is reached, wherein the
heat dissipated is equal to the heat generated. But with the increase in
temperature, the resistance of the solid insulation decreases due to the negative
temperature coefficient of resistance resulting in increase of current. Losses are
further increased due to increase of current, and this leads to a run-away condition
resulting in an eventual breakdown. Hence, with the increase in the time of
application of voltage, the dielectric strength at power frequency reduces. For
most of the insulating materials, the infinite time strength is approximately twothirds of the one-minute strength, and the one-second strength is about 1.6 times
the one-minute strength [21].
The dependence of the oil dielectric strength on the duration of voltage
application is erratic as compared to the solid insulation. Although it is difficult to
obtain definite volt-time characteristics, it can be said that the dielectric strength
reduces rapidly after few seconds and remains more or less constant after few
minutes for power frequency test voltages. It requires time for impurities to get
lined up and bridge the gap; hence for very short time of application the strength
is very high.
Like the duration of voltage application, the frequency of test voltage has a
significant effect on the insulation strength; the increase in frequency results in
reduction of strength, and thus increases rapidly the severity of the powerfrequency overvoltage test. As the frequency increases, the dielectric loss and
heating increase, reducing the strength of the solid insulation. The strength does
not vary in the linear proportion to the reciprocal of frequency [22] but
approximately with an exponent of 0.137, i.e., strength
The effect of
increase in frequency has much smaller effect on the oil strength as compared to
the solid insulation. In general, it can be concluded that the increase of frequency
has a harmful effect on the strength of transformer insulation during the powerfrequency overvoltage tests. If the frequency is increased, the time of application
of voltage should be reduced to produce the same amount of dielectric stress.
Hence, the test standards specify the total number of cycles for the power
frequency induced overvoltage test. When this test (in which the insulation is
stressed to at least twice the voltage/turn) is conducted, frequency is also
increased in order to avoid the core saturation. With the increase in frequency,
time of application of voltage is reduced to maintain the same degree of severity.
The IEC standard 60076–3, second edition: 2000, specifies that the test time
should be 60 seconds for any frequency upto and including twice the rated
frequency. For a test frequency higher than twice the rated frequency, the test time
should be reduced and calculated in accordance with the formula,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

338

Chapter 8
(8.13)

subject to a limit that it should not be less than 15 seconds. In other words, the
number of cycles for the test is fixed; 6000 cycles for 50 Hz and 7200 cycles for 60
Hz transformer. Hence, for a 50 Hz transformer, if the test is conducted at 200 Hz,
the test duration will be 30 seconds.
The effect of time and frequency of the voltage (during the power-frequency
overvoltage test) on the creepage strength is not significant as compared to that on
the puncture of the solid insulation [22]. The creepage breakdown in the absence
of conducting material impurities is mostly decided by the oil failure, and the
increase of frequency does not result in significant decrease of the oil strength due
to smaller heat effect [23].
Regarding impulse volt-time curves, two types of curves are derived in the
literature. For the first one, called full-wave volt-time curve, a full impulse wave is
applied across the insulation and the breakdown may occur either on the wavefront or wave-tail portion or may not occur if the voltage is quite low. A volt-time
curve is plotted using these breakdown points. For the second one, the wave-front
slope is varied, and for each slope value the voltage is increased till the
breakdown occurs. This front-of-wave volt-time curve is of similar nature but has
somewhat different values as compared to the full-wave volt-time curve.
The impulse volt-time curve of the insulation used in a transformer is
drastically different than that of the air insulation. Typical curves for oil and oilimpregnated pressboard are shown in figure 8.8. The curves indicate that the oil
and solid insulations have flat characteristics after few microseconds. Composite
oil-solid insulation generally has the volt-time characteristics close to that of the
solid insulation alone. It is reported in [24] that the dependence of dielectric
strength on the impulse duration in the range of 10-3 to 10-1 seconds is small for
major insulation consisting of oil-barrier system (e.g., gap between windings).
The impulse ratio can be defined as the ratio of impulse full wave strength to
one-minute r.m.s. AC (50 or 60 cycle) strength. Few of the earlier researchers have
reported impulse and one-minute volt-time characteristics [25,26,27] and the
corresponding impulse ratios. With the introduction of concept of partial
discharge later on, volt-time curves for partial discharge inception voltage have
also been reported. The partial discharge and breakdown volt-time curves, and
corresponding impulse ratios are reported in [28] for three different cases, viz.
turn-to-turn insulation, disk-to-disk insulation and oil duct insulation between
barriers. It has been shown that the breakdown volt-time curve, as expected, is
significantly above the partial discharge volt-time curve in the microsecond
range. The two curves come very close to each other in the AC long-term region of
several minutes as shown by the typical curves in figure 8.9. It means that for very
short times, a partial discharge initiated is not sufficient to cause the breakdown,
whereas in the longer duration of several minutes its magnitude is sufficient to
cause the breakdown of the insulation.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

339

Figure 8.8 (a) Volt-time curve of oil-gap
(b) Volt-time curve of oil-impregnated pressboard

In transformer works, different dielectric tests, viz. lightning impulse,
switching impulse and short-time/long-time power frequency tests, are carried out
separately independent of each other. In actual power system operation, the
transformer may be subjected to superimposed AC and lightning impulse
voltages. The dielectric strength under such superimposed AC and lightning stress
levels is reported in [29]. The breakdown voltage under the superimposed stress
condition can be significantly lower than the corresponding value for the
lightning impulse alone.

Figure 8.9 Breakdown (BD) and Partial Discharge (PD) volt-time curves [28]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

340

Chapter 8

Gas Insulated Substations (GIS) are being widely used all over the world.
Disconnecting switch operations in GIS generate steep front transient
overvoltages characterized by a rise time of few nanoseconds (5 to 20 ns), a short
duration of several microseconds and amplitude as high as 2.5 per-unit. The 50%
breakdown probability voltage of oil-paper insulation is reported [30] lower for
steep fronted GIS transients than for lightning impulses. The oil-paper insulated
equipment like transformers or their bushings, subjected to GIS transients, may
fail at voltages below the lightning impulse level. Hence, the insulation of
transformers for the GIS application must be designed with due consideration to
these steep fronted transients.
Sometimes transformers are subjected to high frequency oscillatory
overvoltages. In such cases, the damping of oscillation (defined as the ratio of two
consecutive amplitudes of the same polarity) has significant impact on the
dielectric strength of insulation; the strength increases with the increase in
damping. For example, the strength for an undamped oscillating voltage of
frequency of 0.9 MHz is below the dielectric strength for the lightning impulse,
whereas with a damping ratio of 0.9 the strength is in the same range of that for the
lightning impulse voltage [31].
8.3.3 Effect of temperature
As temperature increases, the dielectric strength of most of the solid insulations
reduces. Due to increase in dielectric loss (and power factor), insulation
temperature goes up further. The insulation ohmic resistance reduces with the
increase of temperature, which results in flow of more current in the insulation. It
may finally lead to the current run-away condition and eventual breakdown. The
deterioration of the solid insulation strength with increase of temperature is
opposite to the effect usually observed for the transformer oil.
The oil dielectric strength usually increases with temperature in the operating
range. A marked improvement in the strength with the temperature increase is
observed for the oil containing high moisture content. The temperature effects are
dynamic in the sense that a considerable amount of time is required for
establishing equilibrium between moisture in the oil and that in the solid
insulation made of cellulose material. During different thermal loading
conditions, there is a continuous interchange of moisture affecting the strength to
some extent. For a reasonable temperature rise, the amount of moisture in the oil
reduces, and thus this helps to keep the transformer insulation system in a healthy
condition. It is known that an increase of temperature usually increases the
mobility of carriers and conductivity. Hence, the breakdown voltage of oil should
decrease with the increase in temperature; experiments conducted by many
researchers show the opposite trend. The variation of carriers and mobility,
therefore, may not possibly be used to explain the results of experiments. There is
some amount of gas bubbles present in the oil and their solubility increases with
temperature; this explains the increase of strength with the temperature [32].

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

341

Hence, it is generally not preferable to keep a transformer idle for a long time.
Even a spare transformer should be kept in no-load condition for a reasonable
amount of time periodically. The strength increases with temperature from -5°C to
about 80 to 100°C; above which it reduces [21, 33]. Below -5°C, the strength
increases rapidly as moisture particles in suspension get frozen.
8.3.4 Effect of thickness
It is known that dielectric strength of insulation does not generally increase in
direct proportion to its thickness in a non-uniform field. The strength of the
insulating materials can be expressed by the simple exponential formula [34],
(8.14)
The value of numerical constant n varies from 0.5 to 1.0 depending up on the
processing/treatment of material and degree of non-uniformity of the field. For an
untreated insulation, n is lower as compared to a treated insulation. For better
shaped electrodes giving uniform field, its value is higher than that for a nonuniform field. For an electrode with a small radius, there is more crowding of
equipotential lines at the electrode surface resulting in higher stress and lower
value of breakdown voltage. The above equation indicates that with the increase
in voltage rating, the insulation content of the transformer increases more rapidly.
8.3.5 Stressed volume effects
It is well-known that the breakdown strength of the transformer oil decreases
statistically with the increase in its stressed volume [35]. This is also in line with
the general fact that insulation strength reduces with the increasing area of
insulation under test [36]. The oil dielectric strength reduces with the increase in
stressed volume for both power frequency and impulse voltages [13]. Although,
designers take either stressed area or stressed volume for strength considerations,
it is generally agreed that the size of the structure is instrumental in the breakdown
process. The strength calculations based on stressed oil volume are more
commonly used in the industry. A breakdown in a gap is usually initiated at the
weakest spot under a high stress condition. If in some other gap, a greater volume
of oil is subjected to the same level of stress, it is quite probable that a still weaker
spot will be present, resulting in breakdown at a lower voltage. Amount of
impurities and electrode protrusions become quite important considerations for
the area/volume effects. Usually the relationship between the breakdown strength
and stressed volume is obtained experimentally from a number of breakdown
studies for various types of electrode configurations. The breakdown strength for
a plain oil gap is expressed in terms of the stressed oil volume (for power
frequency test voltages) as [12]

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

342

Chapter 8
E=17.9(SOV)-0.137 kVrms/mm

(8.15)

where stressed oil volume (SOV) is in cm3. In [37], the 50% breakdown probability
stress for one-minute power frequency voltage is calculated as
E=11.5(SOV)(-1/9.5)+2.5 kVrms/mm

(8.16)

where SOV is in cm3. It can be verified that the strengths given by the formulae
8.15 and 8.16 give the values of E of the same order for practical values of SOV (for
the cases such as high voltage lead to ground configuration). The design should
be such that the calculated stress value should be lower than E by some margin
which is decided based on experience. It is assumed in above equations that
electrodes are covered with some minimum thickness of paper insulation.
Thus, if a failure is predominantly decided by particles/impurities, a larger oil
volume will provide more number of particles which are drawn into high stress
zones, which may subsequently lead to a breakdown. However, a point is reached
after which a further increase in volume will have insignificant effect on the
strength since there is little influence of field on remote zones unless the field
divergence is quite low. Hence, the volume in the above equations is taken as
corresponding to the region in which the calculated electric stress values are
between the maximum value and 90% of the maximum value.
Equations 8.15 and 8.16 tell us that with the increase in stressed volume, the
dielectric strength of the insulation system reduces. If the electrode radius is
increased, the stress values reduce; but at the same time the stressed oil volume
(between maximum value and 90% of maximum value) increases reducing
withstand. Hence, the optimum electrode contour can be determined by studying
the relative variation of stress and strength due to the changes made in the
electrode contour [38].
8.3.6 Creepage phenomenon
The solid insulation is used inside a transformer at a number of places, viz.
between turns, between layers, between disks, between winding and ground, and
between windings. The designer is confronted with mainly two types of electrical
failures, viz. puncture and creepage. The puncture strength of the solid insulation
is significantly higher than the creepage strength. Its creepage strength is
maximum when it is along equipotential lines, i.e., when electric field (E) is
normal to the insulation surface (equipotential lines are at right angles to the
electric field). Due to complications of winding construction and connections, it
is difficult to keep the field normal to the insulation surface everywhere. Also, it is
not always possible to bend the solid insulation components to any desired radius
or contour. In any case, considering the fact that the electric field is actually a
three-dimensional one, difficulties of having shaped insulation components
normal to the field are obvious. These places, where there is a field component
parallel to the insulation surface, the strength is significantly reduced. When there

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

343

is a failure along the surface of a insulation, it is termed as a creepage failure
phenomenon. If the placement of the solid insulation results in stresses along its
surface, much of the purpose of using it, viz. subdivision of oil ducts for higher
overall strength, will get lost.
The creepage flashover characteristics of oil-pressboard interfaces have been
analyzed and reported in a number of papers [39,40]. A permittivity mismatch of
two insulation materials usually assists flashover phenomenon at the interface
[41]. The electric field in the oil immediately adjacent to the pressboard gets
distorted due to the permittivity mismatch. Significant improvements can be
gained by matching permittivities of the oil and pressboard insulations [42]. Thus,
a pressboard having permittivity close to that of the oil not only reduces the oil
stress but also results in higher value of flashover voltage along the oil-pressboard
interface [43]. Hence, with a low permittivity pressboard, there is significant scope
for optimization of insulation content since the electric field distribution will
become more uniform in the oil-paper-pressboard insulation system of transformers.
A low permittivity pressboard, manufactured by blending polymethylpentene
fiber with cellulose fiber, has been used in a 765 kV, 500 MVA transformer [43].
8.3.7 Cumulative stress calculations
Using calculations based on SOV, the strength of an oil gap can be calculated as
discussed in section 8.3.5 (SOV based calculations are more relevant for larger oil
gaps). Another approach, in which cumulative stress calculations are done, is
commonly used for the design of the insulation system of transformers. The
approach is used for both creepage withstand assessment and oil gap design.
For estimating creepage withstand characteristics, the cumulative stress
distribution is determined along the oil-solid interface. For two electrode case,
finding the cumulative stress distribution is easy. The maximum stress is usually
at one of the electrodes, and it reduces as we go towards the other electrode. Hence,
the cumulative stress at any point is the difference between the electrode voltage
(which is maximum) and voltage at that point divided by its distance from the
electrode. For complex electrode configurations, with more than two electrodes,
the maximum stress may not be at one of the extremities of the path (interface)
under consideration, in which case the cumulative stress calculation starts from
this maximum stress point. The creepage stress distribution along a solid-oil
interface can be calculated by using the procedure described in [44]. Let us
consider a solid-oil interface shown in figure 8.10.

Figure 8.10 Cumulative stress calculation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

344

Chapter 8

Let us assume that the potential values, calculated by some method at points 1, 2,
3, 4 and 5, spaced at 2 mm distance, are as given in the figure. It is also assumed
that the stress is maximum at point 3 (having value 7 kVrms/mm). The creepage
stress is calculated for a unit length of 2 mm in either direction from point 3, and
the path is extended in the direction of higher stress. Next, the cumulative stress is
calculated for 4 mm length in either direction as shown in table 8.1. The
calculation procedure is continued till the entire path is traced. The calculated
cumulative stress values are plotted in figure 8.11. The withstand for each of these
creepage distances (for power frequency overvoltages) can be calculated by [45]
Ecreep=15d2-0.37 kVrms/mm

(8.17)

where d2 is the creepage path length in mm. The equation is valid for a degassed
oil and a good quality solid insulation with clean surface. The above equation for
creepage strength is in line with the curve arrived in [46,12] by considering
creepage field strengths for four different configurations.
It should be remembered that the calculated cumulative stress levels should be
lower than the value given by equation 8.17 by a margin depending on quality of
components and manufacturing processes, i.e., the margin between the creepage
withstand and creepage stress for any length should be more than a certain value
fixed by the transformer designer based on experience/established practices.
Usually, the creepage strength is considered about 30% lower than the bulk oil
(jump) strength [47,48]. The reference withstand curve for bulk oil (for power
frequency overvoltages) is described by the following equation [12],
Eoil=18d1-0.38 kVrms/mm

(8.18)

where d1 is the oil gap distance in mm between covered electrodes, and the oil is
considered without gases.

Table 8.1 Cumulative stress calculation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

345

Figure 8.11 Plot of cumulative stress

It is always advisable to cover the electrodes with some insulation as it
improves the strength by about 15 to 20% [12]. The creep withstand calculated by
equation 8.17 is about 17 to 13% lower than the bulk oil withstand given by
equation 8.18 (for a length of 1 to 100 mm), but as a conservative value it can be
taken 30% lower as mentioned earlier for any distance. The creep withstand has
been taken about 21% lower than the bulk oil strength in [49].
Thus, we have seen that there are two distinct approaches for determining
withstand for bulk oil breakdown phenomenon; one is based on distance
(equation 8.18 above) and other is based on stressed oil volume (equation 8.15 or
8.16). These two approaches are not contradicting each other, and the consistency
of strength given as a function of gap length with the well established theory of
stressed oil volume has been elaborated in [12].
8.3.8 Effect of oil velocity
Oil velocity has noticeable effect on its breakdown characteristics. It is reported in
[37] that the power frequency breakdown voltage of moving oil at a velocity of
about 25 cm/s is equal to that of stationary oil. It is higher than stationary oil by 10
to 15% at about 5 cm/s and lower than stationary oil when the velocity exceeds
100 cm/s. The explanation for this particular behavior is as follows. If oil
movement is more dominant than the force by which impurities are swept and
drawn in high stress zones as observed in the case of stationary oil, the breakdown
voltage tends to be higher with the increase in velocity. When the velocity
increases beyond a certain value, reduction of the breakdown voltage may be
linked to the stressed oil volume effect, wherein the probability of large number of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

346

Chapter 8

impurities passing through a high stress zone between the electrodes increases.
This phenomenon is in line with the weak-link theory; the chances that weak-link
of the oil (particle/impurity) may initiate a discharge are higher due to the fact that
more volume of oil passes through the stressed zone of an insulation arrangement
[14]. Contrary to this theory, a higher velocity shortens the time for which
impurities will remain in high stress zones and the breakdown voltage should
increase as per volt-time characteristics. Hence, the breakdown voltage at higher
velocities will depend on which of the two effects, volt-time or oil volume effect,
is the deciding factor. For impulse conditions, the breakdown voltage does not
seem to be affected by the oil velocity.

8.3.9 Processing of insulation
Removal of moisture and impurities from the insulation is one of the most
important processes of transformer manufacture. With the increase in the size of
transformers, the time taken for processing of their insulation also increases. The
time taken by a conventional hot air—vacuum process is considerably higher for
large transformers with high voltage ratings, and it may be unacceptable to the
transformer manufacturer. The conventional drying method may take more than 7
days for a 220 kV class transformer. The method consists of heating core-windings
assembly with air as a medium and applying vacuum for extracting the moisture.
The moisture content of the insulation can be reduced by raising its temperature
and/or by reducing water vapour partial pressure, i.e. by vacuum. The application
of vacuum speeds up the moisture extraction process; heating alone will take
more time to remove a given amount of moisture from the solid insulation.
Depending on the rating and voltage class of the transformer, several cycles of
alternate heating and vacuum are required till the transformer insulation is dried.
A moisture content of less than 0.5% is usually taken as the acceptance criterion
for ending the process.
Requirement of a faster and more efficient process along with the need for
better insulation performance resulted in the development and use of kerosene
Vapour Phase Drying (VPD) method [50]. It is a fast and efficient method in which
kerosene vapour at a high temperature is used as the heating medium instead of
hot air (used in the conventional method). A special grade of kerosene, heated to
about 130°C in an evaporator and converted into vapour form, is injected into the
autoclave or transformer tank housing the core-windings assembly. As the process
of heating is done under vacuum, the moisture extraction starts taking place
during the heating period itself. When the insulation reaches a certain desired
temperature, a fine vacuum is applied to remove the remaining moisture. In the
VPD process, the windings and insulation are almost uniformly heated, whereas in
the conventional process the inner insulation may not get heated to the desired
temperature. The total process time in the VPD method is less than half the
conventional method. In the conventional method, as heating is done through the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

347

medium of air with the presence of oxygen, the temperature is limited to about
110°C. On the contrary, in the VPD process, the drying is done in an oxygen free
atmosphere (virtually in vacuum), and hence there are no harmful effects or loss of
insulation life even at 130°C. Thus, the uniform heating at higher temperature
under vacuum results in faster removal of moisture. The VPD process has the other
advantage of vapour condensing on colder winding and insulation parts, thus
washing out the impurities improving the dielectric properties. This aspect of VPD
is extremely useful when one wants to clean the windings of transformers which
come back to factory for repair or when windings are inspected to find a fault in a
transformer failed in a test. With the uniform heating of all insulation parts, the
shrinkage is also uniform and no further shrinkage is likely during the transformer
operation at site, ensuring the mechanical strength of the windings.
Presence of small cellulose particles in oil has pronounced effect on its
dielectric strength. Due to hygroscopic nature of cellulose, moisture in the oil
plays a decisive role as it gets absorbed into the cellulose. The cellulose particles
have deteriorating effect on the strength even when the ppm content of moisture
in the oil is well within limits; the water content (saturation) in cellulose
insulation is the deciding factor. Hence, it is absolutely essential to minimize
content of suspended cellulose particles and fibers in the oil. These particles
usually originate from the surface of paper/pressboard insulation. The major
sources of these particles are the edges of radial spacers (pressboard insulation
between disks) and axial spacers (pressboard strips in major insulation between
windings) if these components do not have a machined finish. Punching
operations required for making these components involve shearing of pressboard.
Burrs, micro-delaminations and subsequent formation of cellulose fibers will be
unavoidable if punching tools are not of good quality or their maintenance is
inadequate. Hence, it is always recommended to have an additional operation of
milling so that the edges of these pressboard components are smooth and free from
fibers.
Once properly processed and impregnated with dry oil, it is important to
prevent moisture from getting access to the oil impregnated solid/paper
insulation through the oil. Simple and widely followed method for small and
medium power transformers is to provide a breather with a dehydrating material
(like silica gel) and an oil seal. The oil seal provides isolation to the dehydrating
material from the atmosphere. Thus, the transformer breathes through the
dehydrating material, and hence the moisture from the atmosphere cannot get into
the transformer oil. Advanced breather systems (e.g., drycol breather) are also
popular in some countries.
Transformer oil deteriorates to some extent when exposed to the atmosphere.
The air acts as an oxidizing agent forming sludge in the oil. Hence, many of the
large transformers, nowadays, are equipped with an air bag fitted inside the
conservator, so that the transformer oil does not come in direct contact with the
outside atmosphere. The changes in oil volume on account of temperature
variations are absorbed by this flexible bag thus maintaining a constant pressure.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

348

Chapter 8

One side of this bag is in contact with the atmosphere through a dehydrating agent
so that if the bag ruptures, the oil does not get exposed to the atmosphere since the
dehydrating breather steps into the conventional mode of operation. Action can
be initiated to replace the ruptured bag in the mean time.
Once the transformer (insulation) is processed, it is filled with dry and degassed
oil (having dielectric characteristics within the acceptable limits) under vacuum.
Immediately after the oil filling, some air bubbles are formed in the insulation
which may lead to partial discharges. Hence, a certain hold/settling time needs to
be provided before the commencement of tests. During the settling period, heavier
particles/impurities settle down at the bottom and the air bubbles move up or get
absorbed. After the hold time, air bubbles should be released by bleeding (through
air release plugs) at the top so that the transformer is free of (trapped) air. With this,
dielectrically critical areas get cleared. The hold time increases with the increase
of voltage rating of transformers. For 132 kV class transformers it should be
minimum 24 to 36 hours, for 220 kV class it should be about 48 hours, and for
400–500 kV class transformers it is desirable to have the hold time of about 72
hours [51]. A lower hold time may be adopted by the transformer manufacturers
based on their experience.

8.4 Test Methods and Design Insulation Level (DIL)
In service, the transformer insulation is subjected continuously to operating
voltages and occasionally to overvoltages. The former decides the working
voltage stress on the insulation. The overvoltages can be broadly divided into
lightning overvoltages (aperiodic surges with duration of one to tens of
microseconds), switching overvoltages (oscillatory surges with duration up to
thousands of microseconds), and temporary overvoltages (lasting for few minutes)
at or close to the power frequency. The standards on transformers have defined
voltage test levels for various voltage classes of transformers. There are basically
four different types of tests, viz. lightning impulse test, switching impulse test,
short duration power frequency test and long duration power frequency test with
partial discharge measurement. While the first three tests check the insulation’s
overvoltage withstand capability, the long duration test is mainly intended for
checking the insulation behavior under the working voltage stress. The design of
insulation between various electrodes is decided by one or more of these test
levels. The inter-disk spacing is decided by impulse stresses, whereas the end
insulation (between windings and yoke) may get predominantly decided by the
power frequency test voltages. The conductor insulation is decided by either the
impulse stress or working voltage stress.
When oil and solid are stressed together, two kinds of failures can usually
occur. In one type, there could be a complete catastrophic failure between two
electrodes (can be jump breakdown, creepage breakdown or combination of
both). This kind of failure is quite uncommon if adequate clearances are provided

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

349

and maintained. The second one is a local oil failure (partial discharge). At one
time, the partial discharge (PD) measurement test was not conducted due to nonavailability of proper instrumentation. Also, many partial discharges used to
result into undetected damages (since the solid insulation acted as a barrier to
propagation of discharges). With the development of instrumentation and
awareness of slow but damaging effect of discharges, the partial discharge test has
become one of the most important tests for high voltage transformers. The
international standards on transformers have defined the voltage levels and
corresponding PD limits. Some manufacturers set their internal norms much lower
than that specified in the standards in order to ensure long-term reliability of
transformers. In order to get very low PD levels, all the sharp electrodes inside the
transformer have to be rounded or electrostatically shielded. Processing and
impregnation procedures have to be excellent for minimizing impurities and air
voids. Also, the manufacturers should have proper instrumentation for the low PD
measurement. Ambient partial discharges in the test set-up area and surrounding
environment have to be minimized. The partial discharges lead to a progressive
damage of insulation resulting into eventual failure after a time period which
depends on their severity and location inside the transformer. Hence, it is
advisable to eliminate all the sources and causes of partial discharges, so that the
progressive deterioration of insulation becomes a remote possibility.
Aim of a transformer engineer should be to design and manufacture a partial
discharge free transformer. It should be noted that the impregnation of insulation
may not be perfect and also it may not be possible to control the dielectric field
uniformly at all locations. Hence, in practice some amounts of partial discharges
are always there; endeavor should be to minimize them. The electric stress values
below the PD inception levels do not result into ageing of the mechanical strength
of the pressboard. In such a case, the life of pressboard insulation is decided by the
mechanical strength as affected by thermal conditions [43]. The PD is usually
measured either in pico-coulombs or micro-volts. Detection and measurement of
PD at its origin is very difficult. The two major approaches of PD detection, viz.
acoustic and electrical signal based, are discussed in chapter 12.
Design Insulation Level: After calculating the voltages at critical places inside
a transformer (within the windings, at the ends of windings, on the surface of leads,
etc.) under all the test conditions, it is quite meaningful to convert these voltages
to one equivalent voltage, which is usually the (one-minute) short duration power
frequency voltage. This equivalent voltage level is called as Design Insulation
Level (DIL) which is expressed in kVrms. Thus, at any point inside the transformer,
there is only one DIL, which is the maximum of equivalent one-minute power
frequency voltage levels during the four different tests. This approach is widely
followed by transformer designers simplifying the insulation design process. The
conversion factors used by different manufacturers for converting the calculated
voltages (under various tests) to one-minute r.m.s. value may not be identical but
they fall in a narrow range.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

350

Chapter 8

Table 8.2 Factors for conversion to one-minute (r.m.s.) power frequency level

Test voltage
Lightning Impulse Level (BIL)
Switching Impulse Level (SIL)
Long duration (one hour) power frequency voltage

Multiplication factor
~(1/2.30)=0.44
~(1/1.80)=0.55
~(1/0.80)=1.25

The factors reported in [48] are given in table 8.2. The conversion factor for one
hour power frequency test voltage is in agreement with the following equation
given in [37],
Vt=(1/t)0.055V1

(8.19)

where V1 and Vt are the 50% breakdown probability voltages for 1 minute and t
minutes respectively. The equation gives V60/V1 as 0.8, which is in line with that
given in table 8.2.
The multiplication factor for BIL in table 8.2 is in line with the impulse ratio
(the ratio of lightning impulse level to power frequency level) of about 2.3 as
evident from table 8.3 which gives commonly used BIL and power frequency test
levels for various voltage classes. An impulse ratio in the range of 2.3 to 2.5 is
being used in the industry [11,12] while calculating the equivalent DIL
corresponding to a BIL value. This value of impulse ratio represents an average
correction factor for the impulse voltage duration in the range of 10 to 100
microseconds. The overvoltages stressing the inter-disk or inter-turn insulation
during the impulse test may be shorter than 10 microseconds in which case the
correction factor seems conservative. The impulse ratio of 2.68 has been
suggested in [24] for 1.5/40 microsecond impulse waveform while designing
inter-winding and inter-disk insulation, giving the corresponding multiplication
factor of 0.37 for BIL in table 8.2 (in place of 0.44). A lower multiplication factor
may open avenues for insulation optimization since in that case the equivalent
DIL value is lower. On the other hand for impulse overvoltages of more than
hundreds of microseconds duration (close to switching transients), it is risky to
use the impulse ratio between 2.3 to 2.5 (it should be lower). Thus, the correction
factor should be judiciously selected based on detailed analysis and experimental
data. For AC voltages and non-oscillatory impulses having duration other than
that of lightning, switching and long duration power frequency voltages, an
interpolation may be done with caution for finding DIL [47].
Table 8.3 Impulse ratio

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

351

Figure 8.12 Subdivided duct between LV and HV windings

Having estimated the Design Insulation Level at critical electrodes inside the
transformer, one can proceed with the design of insulation system.

8.5 Insulation Between Two Windings
The gap between low voltage (LV) and high voltage (HV) windings is subdivided
into many oil ducts by means of solid insulating barriers (figure 8.12). The
insulation system of oil cooled power transformers consists of combination of oil
and solid insulations (paper and pre-compressed board). The oil and solid
insulations are cheaper than most other insulating materials, and as a combination
they give much higher dielectric strength than individually.
In an oil-pressboard insulation system, since the maximum admissible stress in
a good quality pressboard for one-minute power frequency overvoltage is about
40 kVrms/mm [47], the limiting design stress values are primarily due to stress in
oil. In a good quality system with degassed oil and near uniform field distribution
(e.g., between barriers in the HV-LV gap), typical PD inception field strength
(stress) value for a 8 mm oil duct is 10 kVrms/mm for insulated winding
conductors [46,52]. Since the stress is high at winding conductor corners, the PD
inception field strength of 8 mm oil duct next to windings for degassed oil is
lower, i.e., about 8.4 kVrms/mm. The allowed (design) stress values can be lower
than these PD inception strength values depending on the required safety margin
and quality of manufacturing processes. Thus, the dielectric strength of the solid
insulation is much higher than that of the oil. Since the electric stress (E) is
inversely proportional to the permittivity, the stress in the oil is significantly
higher than that in the solid insulation. The oil permittivity (≅ 2.2)is about half
that of the solid insulation, hence the oil stress is twice the solid insulation stress
in uniform fields. Since the oil has to bear higher stress, it is recommended to make
barriers as thin as possible and give more space for the oil ducts. In the oil-paperpressboard insulation system, the strength of the insulation arrangement is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

352

Chapter 8

predominantly decided by the strength of the oil ducts. Hence, the design of
transformer insulation system essentially means the design of oil ducts and oilsolid interfaces. For a given total gap between two windings, there is no advantage
gained in increasing solid insulation thickness just because its strength is higher.
On the contrary, higher solid insulation thickness results in more stress in oil
ducts. The barriers should be as thin as possible, permitted from mechanical
strength considerations. Barriers with a thickness of 1.5 to 2 mm are generally
used for getting good mechanical stability. The lower the oil duct width, the
higher the withstand stress (kV/mm) is. The number of barriers in the interwinding gap should be adequate so that larger oil gaps are avoided (width of oil
duct more than 12 mm is usually not recommended in the inter-winding gap).
Insulating barriers have an additional function of acting as barriers against the
propagation of a discharge streamer in the oil between electrodes. The barriers
break the oil path into smaller ducts and prevent lining up of impurities in the oil.
The size of first duct next to windings should be properly chosen. Although a
small width is desirable as it gives higher kV/mm withstand value, thermal
considerations may not allow the use of duct width below 6 mm. The first duct is
usually of 6 to 10 mm size. Withstand for the ducts (first duct and other ducts in
HV-LV gap) can be found out by referring published curves [46, 52] for four types
of gaps, viz. degassed oil between barriers, gas saturated oil between barriers,
degassed first oil duct and gas saturated first oil duct. The maximum stress in the
first duct has to be accurately determined (say, by FEM analysis). The breakdown
gradients obtained for a typical configuration are given in [24]. The values of
breakdown gradients for yoke-end-line-lead arrangement (line terminal at yoke
end of winding) are lower than that for center-line-lead arrangement (line terminal
taken at the midpoint of the winding stack with two parallel branches). This is
because the field distribution in the first duct at the line terminal is quite nonuniform for the former as compared to the latter arrangement. Actual design values
should be smaller than the breakdown values depending on the margin to be kept.
The HV-LV (HILO) gap value is usually based on the average stress (which is of the
order of 5.5 to 6 kVrms/mm) given by [53]

(8.20)
A manufacturing tolerance is added to the HILO gap calculated by the above
equation. For winding to end limb clearance (e.g., in single-phase three-limb
construction) or innermost winding to core clearance, a lower value of Eav is used
due to the presence of sharp corners of core. In some critical cases, an electrostatic
shield is used around the core/end limb facing the windings. The phase-to-phase
insulation design is very similar but the stresses due to switching impulse and
power frequency test levels need to be considered; most of the times the voltages
between phases are 150% of phase to ground voltage levels.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

353

8.6 Internal Insulation
Internal/minor insulation consists of all the insulation components within the
winding, viz. conductor paper covering, insulation between layers in the radial
direction, insulation between turns or disks in the axial direction, and special
insulating components that are placed close to the insulated conductors.
In addition to withstanding short and long duration overvoltages during tests
at manufacturer’s works and operation at site, the conductor insulation has to
withstand a continuous working voltage stress. This is particularly important
criterion for deciding the conductor insulation in the case of interleaved main and
tap windings. In such windings, physically adjacent turns are electrically many
turns apart, resulting in significantly higher working stress. The conductor paper
covering in such cases gets predominantly decided by this working stress. For
example, in a disk winding the total stressed paper area can be calculated as
As=Mt×k×(Nt-1)×w×Nd×Np

(8.21)

where Mt=mean turn length of winding,
Nt=number of turns per disk, w=width of conductor,
k=multiplying factor which depends on degree of interleaving (e.g., it has a
value of 2 for conductor interleaving shown in figure 7.7),
Nd=number of disks per phase, Np=number of phases.
The higher the stressed paper area, the lower the allowed working voltage stress
is. Figure 8.13 gives the allowed voltage per mm of paper insulation thickness
between turns as a function of the stressed paper insulation area. The voltage per
mm allowed is usually in the range of 2400 to 4000 V/mm. The voltage per turn of
the transformer, corresponding to the continuous overvoltage condition, is
divided by the paper insulation thickness between two turns. The value obtained
should be less than that given by figure 8.13 (the y axis values are not marked
since they depend on individual manufacturer’s established design practices).

Figure 8.13 Working voltage stress

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

354

Chapter 8

Figure 8.14 Angle ring placed at inside diameter of outer winding

Considering primarily the lightning impulse stresses, special insulating
components are used closely hugging the paper insulated winding conductors.
These are usually placed at line end disks or turns, where the resultant stress at the
disk corner is quite high. This solution is beneficial as compared to increasing the
conductor paper insulation which would reduce the series capacitance, increase
the winding temperature rise and reduce the winding space factor. These special
insulating components inside the winding are called as disk angle rings (figure
8.14) or disk angle caps (figure 8.15). Since they are closely fitted to the winding
conductor, the oil stress is reduced (since the oil duct shifts away from the
conductor). Thus, they are doing the same function as achieved by increasing the
conductor radius. If these are made from layers of paper insulation, they become
flexible and can easily take the shape of the conductor eliminating oil voids
between them and the paper covered conductors. On the contrary, if they are made
from molded solid insulation, small oil voids may exist which then will have
higher stress. Being of very small length, the withstand strength of the voids is
also high. In any case, it is always preferable to have angle rings/caps closely
fitting the conductors to eliminate voids.

Figure 8.15 Angle cap placed at outside diameter of inner winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

355

The angle caps are used to protect the winding corners from adjacent winding
or end limb as shown in figure 8.15. Angle rings/caps made from molded material
are usually available in sector shaped form, which have to be overlapped by doing
proper chamfering. The overlapping distance is usually kept as 30 to 40 times the
thickness of the angle ring/cap.
Although it is essential to achieve the uniform initial impulse voltage
distribution, what is more important from the insulation design point of view is
getting uniform dielectric stresses in relation to strength values. Generally, it is
very difficult to get the initial impulse voltages between disks/turns equal
throughout the winding; the insulation should be designed such that the margin
between the strength and stress is in the same range of values along the winding
height. This is an ideal design; but it may not be possible since for cooling
purposes adequate inter-disk or inter-turn gaps are kept at the neutral end even
though the stresses are low. It is not advisable to increase turn or disk insulation,
where stresses are high, without detailed calculations. There could be failure even
if extra insulation is provided because the increase in strength may not be
commensurate with the increase in stress due to a reduced series capacitance.

Figure 8.16 Typical end insulation arrangement of a power transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

356

Chapter 8

Figure 8.17 Analysis of oil ducts in end insulation region

8.7 Design of End Insulation
In the composite oil-solid insulation system, the strength of the insulation
arrangement is predominantly determined by the strength of oil gaps. The solid
insulation is used to subdivide long oil gaps (having lower dielectric strengths)
into smaller ones. While assessing the end insulation design, the strengths of oil
gaps and solid-oil interfaces are evaluated. The FEM analysis is commonly used
for estimation of electrostatic field distribution. A typical end insulation
arrangement is shown in figure 8.16. The electric stress distributions along
various contours between windings and between yoke and windings are
examined [54]. Two such contours are shown in the figure with dotted lines.
For each oil duct within the selected contour (e.g., A-C), the cumulative field
distribution is determined by integrating the field along the contour starting from
the maximum value as described in section 8.3.7. If in an oil gap, the maximum
stress is at one of the extremes, the calculations are greatly simplified since the
cumulative stress at any point with a distance of d from the point of maximum
stress on the contour is calculated as the voltage difference between the two points
divided by d. In this case the cumulative stress is
(8.22)
The cumulative oil stress values for each oil gap along the contour A-C are plotted
and compared with a reference strength/withstand curve (described by formula
such as equation 8.18) as shown in figure 8.17.
The end insulation arrangement would be optimum if the minimum margin
between the withstand and stress curves is approximately same for all the ducts.
The task of insulation designers is to adjust the barriers/angle rings in such a way
that the minimum margin in each resulting oil duct is greater than some fixed
safety margin value and that these minimum margins are in the same range of
values. The minimum safety margin is decided by insulation designers depending

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

357

on the quality of oil-solid insulation and technology of drying and oil
impregnation processes. Usually a 25 to 35% safety margin in critically stressed
parts of the transformer insulation is considered as sufficient to pass successfully
the long duration (one hour) induced overvoltage test without partial discharges
and also the impulse test [55].
The placement of angle rings/caps is an important aspect of end insulation
design. They divide the larger oil ducts into smaller ones increasing the withstand
of the total gap and resulting oil ducts. The angle rings/caps should be placed
along the equipotential lines; otherwise higher creepage stress along their surface
may reduce the dielectric strength. As we go away from the winding corner, the
radius of angle ring/cap should be more so that it lies along an equipotential line
and the creepage stress is minimized. The angle rings/caps with fixed and small
radius of 2 to 3 mm are cheaper than the contoured ones with much higher radius.
But the creepage stress on the angle rings/caps with small radius can be high,
reducing the overall strength of the insulation arrangement. In case one wants to
optimize end insulation clearance, contoured angle rings/caps need to be used
which reduce not only the creepage stress but also the oil duct size in high stress
zones thereby improving the withstand. The effectiveness of a contoured angle
ring can be clearly seen from figure 8.18. The creepage stress along portion AB of
the contoured angle ring is quite less than the corresponding portion CD of the
non-contoured angle ring. The first angle ring/cap should be close to the winding
for having smaller first oil duct width.
Apart from effective subdivision of oil ducts by barriers/angle rings (caps)/
solid washers, it is necessary to reduce the electric stress at the winding corners.
The stress is reduced by placing at winding ends a static end ring (SER) with a
certain minimum corner radius. In lower voltage LV windings, if SER is dispensed
with, turn or disk angle ring/cap is usually placed on the last turn/ disk, which
reduces the stress in the oil duct immediately next to it. The inner and outer
diameters of SER have to be flush with the corresponding diameters of the
winding, and SER should be as close to winding end disk/turn as possible all
along the circumference.

Figure 8.18 Effectiveness of contoured angle ring

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

358

Chapter 8

Figure 8.19 Static end ring

A typical sketch of SER is shown in figure 8.19. The inner radius close to
winding (R2) is usually standardized to 2 mm, whereas outer radius (R1) is
minimum 6 mm and it may be more as the voltage rating and radial depth of the
winding increases. The paper insulation thickness is of the order of 3 mm.
Sometimes a static ring (SR) may be placed between two disks of a winding,
particularly between second and third disks and between fourth and fifth disks
from the line end of a continuous disk winding since the lightning impulse
voltage between these disks can be quite high.
Sometimes, LV winding height is kept more (by few mm) than HV winding
height. The stress at LV corner facing HV winding is lower in this case as compared
to the case wherein LV winding height is equal or shorter than HV winding height.

8.8 High Voltage Lead Clearances
In high voltage transformers, the clearances between leads and ground, between
leads, etc. have to be judiciously selected. Consider a high voltage insulated lead
near a ground plane as shown in figure 8.20. The maximum electric stress in the
paper insulation and oil can be calculated by the well-known formulae given in
section 8.1. The complete stress distribution can be accurately calculated by FEM
analysis.
The oil duct strength can be calculated on the basis of the stressed oil volume
(SOV) theory. The stressed oil volume between the maximum stress and 90% of the
maximum stress (for cylindrical lead—plane configuration) can be calculated by
the following approximate formula [56],

Figure 8.20 High voltage lead insulation

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

359
(8.23)

where r is bare lead radius and l is effective lead length. A more accurate formula
for a bare lead is given in [57]. The accurate SOV for a covered lead and/or for a
complex configuration of electrodes can be calculated by FEM analysis. The 50%
breakdown probability stress for one-minute power frequency voltage can be
calculated from the SOV by using equation 8.16. The safe withstand value is lower
than this breakdown stress value and can be decided by the transformer
manufacturer depending on the acceptable value of % breakdown probability and
the quality of manufacturing processes (which decide the level of impurities)
[37,58]. The margin kept is also a function of manufacturing practices and
working tolerances required. For example, lead to tank clearance may actually be
less than that specified in the drawing. For lower voltages the mechanical
tolerances, lowering clearances and magnetic clearances may dominate the
dielectric design considerations.
An increase in breakdown voltage for the lead to ground configuration can be
obtained by one or more of the following means, viz. increase in clearance,
increase of bare lead diameter, increase in thickness of paper insulation and
placement of barriers to subdivide oil duct. The first option is obviously not cost
effective as it increases the material cost and size of the transformer. Out of the
remaining three options, increase in paper covering has significantly more impact
in improving the withstand [59]. With the increase in paper insulation. more
voltage is dropped across it, reducing the stress in oil. Although a higher paper
insulation results in significant reduction in the oil stress at the covered lead
surface, thermal considerations and manufacturing time required may also be the
deciding factors while standardizing bare diameter, paper insulation thickness
and clearances for various Design Insulation Levels. When the electrode is not
sharp, barriers are put (along equipotential lines) to enhance the strength.
It should be noted that the increase of either bare lead diameter or paper
thickness increases SOV, but reduction in strength (due to increased SOV) is not
significant as compared to reduction in stress value (because of the logarithmic
relationship between the strength and SOV).
When there is a row of tap leads facing either winding or tank, the stress at the
edge of the last lead in the row is less compared to the case of an isolated lead. The
extent of reduction has to be assessed for the worst configuration (giving
minimum reduction) and then accordingly the electrical clearances can be
standardized using the isolated lead to ground clearances. The clearance of the
row of tap leads to ground is usually lower as compared to that of the isolated lead
to ground case.
The above analysis has assumed smooth ground plane. When the ground
electrode is not smooth and is having sharp corners, it becomes difficult to
standardize the clearances. It is preferable to have at least 2 mm radius at the
corners. With such a minimum provision of the corner radius, in the absence of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

360

Chapter 8

detailed analysis, 1 mm of oil gap per kVrms of Design Insulation Level seems to
be a safe design criterion (i.e., the average stress of 1 kVrms/mm). A value of about
1.4 kVrms/mm or more can be used based on experience.
In some cases due to the nearness of high voltage electrodes to the tank surface,
the values of electric field at the tank surface may exceed the permitted values. In
this case, the tank should be covered with a proper insulation [47].
The above analysis holds good for jump clearances in oil between lead and
ground. There is one more design consideration: when the leads are supported by
solid insulation from the grounded part as shown in figure 8.21 (equipotential
lines obtained from FEM analysis are displayed). In this case, the cumulative
creepage stress on the pressboard and the corresponding withstand are calculated
using the procedure given in section 8.3.7. For non-homogeneous field
distributions (involving sharp electrodes), the rule of 1 mm of creepage path per
kVrms may be followed in the absence of detailed analysis.
Sometimes insulating barriers are placed close to high voltage leads in high
stress zones. The combined effects of oil velocity and particles sweeping towards
high stress zones have definite role to play in the power frequency breakdown.
The barriers make the oil flow restricted in the high stress zones so that the
probability of occurrence of breakdown phenomenon (in which floating particles
are drawn into high stress points helping breakdown processes) is reduced to a
great extent. Hence, the barriers can be quite effective when used to subdivide
large oil gaps in the high stress zone. The barriers are effective when they are
placed close to the electrode in the high stress zone along the equipotential lines.
If there is appreciable creepage stress along their surface (due to improper
placement), the overall strength may not improve.

Figure 8.21 Optimum creepage distance calculation by FEM analysis

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

361

Figure 8.22 Insulation arrangement between two disks

Very non-uniform field patterns exist in the vicinity of high voltage leads
between winding terminations and lower bushing connections. Conventionally,
the leads can be covered by a thick paper insulation. This may not help much, as
the stress in the bigger oil duct after thick insulation is still exposed to a high nonuniform field. Also, too much insulation on the lead limits its thermal capability.
The scatter of breakdown voltage for such a wide oil duct can be much higher
resulting in lower dielectric strength. The modern lead exit systems [48] consist of
pressboard barrier systems dividing the oil gap into smaller gaps. The lead is
covered by a thin layer of molded pressboard.

8.9 Statistical Analysis for Optimization and Quality
Enhancement
8.9.1 Parameter design
The optimization of insulation requires identification of components having
significant influence on the insulation stress and strength. Quantification of
effects of different factors affecting the stress and strength helps in optimization.
Orthogonal array design of experiments is one of those techniques which allows
the effect of several parameters to be determined efficiently. The results of these
experiments can be used to judge the relative magnitude of the factor effects. The
analysis of relative effects of the different factors can be obtained by
decomposition of variance which is commonly called as Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA).
An approach for optimization of major insulation of a 400 kV class of
transformer has been described in [60]. Figure 8.22 shows a sectional view of
transformer windings, in which the insulation arrangement of two disks of HV
winding is depicted. The factors affecting the maximum oil stress and strength are,
viz. conductor radius (R), conductor paper covering (PC), disk angle ring
thickness (DAR), HV-LV gap, duct between disks, first oil duct width and voltage

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

362

Chapter 8

difference between electrodes. The quantification of effect of these factors has
been reported in [60], for a particular arrangement of 400 kV transformer winding,
which is based on 36 FEM simulations for specific combinations of above seven
factors. Such an analysis helps designer to do the parameter design, i.e., choosing
the optimum combination of these factors. A quadratic surface, generated by using
multiple regression analysis to express the oil stress in terms of the factors, can be
used further for the tolerance design as explained below.
8.9.2 Tolerance design
Insulation optimization cannot be done in isolation without due consideration to
variations usually observed during the manufacturing processes. The tolerance
design methodology can be used to identify critical insulation components
whose manufacturing variation needs to be controlled. For this, the deviations in
dimensions of all (control) factors are first found out by choosing the random
samples from the manufacturing site. The standard deviation (SD) can be
calculated from the data. For the tolerance design, three levels of factors can be
taken [61] around the mean (m) as
and
Either
FEM simulations can be used to obtain the oil stress values for the specific
combinations of the factors or the quadratic surface generated earlier (in the
parameter design stage) can be used expediting the analysis. The subsequent
ANOVA analysis reveals the relative effects of manufacturing variations of the
factors on the stress values. This can help the transformer manufacturer to identify
manufacturing processes which need to be controlled on priority to help
reliability enhancement/optimization efforts. The extra investment needed to
improve a particular process can also be justified by such an analysis.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

McDonald, D. The electrolytic analogue in the design of high voltage power
transformers, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 100, Pt. II, 1953, pp. 145–166.
Birke, P.V., Lackey, J., and Palmer, S. Determination of highly stressed volumes in oil dielectrics, IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation, Vol. EI-7,
No. 3, September 1972, pp. 139–144.
Cockcroft, J.D. The effect of curved boundaries on the distribution of electrical stress around conductors, Journal IEE, Vol. 66, 1928, pp. 385–409.
Fogaras, L. and Lampe, W. Calculation of electrical field strength around
transformer winding corners, IEEE Transaction on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-87, No. 2, February 1968, pp. 399–405.
Galloway, R.H., Ryan, H. M., and Scott, M.F. Calculation of electric fields by
digital computer, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 114, No. 6, June 1967, pp. 824–829.
Wexler, A. Computation of electromagnetic fields, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. MTT-17, No. 8, August 1969, pp. 416–
439.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

363

7. Rele, A., Palmer, S., and Birke, P.V. Dielectric stress calculations for EHV
transformer winding, IEEE PES Summer Meeting, Vancouver, Canada, 1973,
Paper No. C-73–396–9.
8. Andersen, O.W. Laplacian electrostatic field calculations by finite elements
with automatic grid generation, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. PAS-92, September/October 1973, pp. 1485–1492.
9. Singer, H., Steinbigler, H., and Weiss, P. A charge simulation method for the
calculation of high voltage fields, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-93, 1974, pp. 1660–1668.
10. Okubo, H., Ikeda, M., Honda, M., and Yanari, T. Electric field analysis by
combination method, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems,
Vol. PAS-101, October 1982, pp. 4039–4048.
11. Tschudi, D.J., Krause, C., Kirch, H.J., Franchek, M.A., and Malewski, R.
Strength of transformer paper-oil insulation expressed by the Weidmann oil
curves, CIGRE 1994, WG 33.03.
12. Nelson, J.K. An assessment of the physical basis for the application of design
criteria for dielectric structures, IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation,
Vol. 24, No. 5, October 1989, pp. 835–847.
13. Nelson, J.K., Salvage, B., and Sharpley, W.A. Electric strength of transformer
oil for large electrode areas, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 118, No. 2, February 1971,
pp. 388–393.
14. Krause, C. Dielectric strength of transformer oil: Impact of oil flow, moisture
and cellulose particles, WICOR Insulation Conference, Rapperswil, Switzerland, September 1996.
15. Norris, E.T. High voltage power transformer insulation, Proceedings IEE, Vol.
110, No. 2, February 1963, pp. 428–440.
16. Miners, K. Particles and moisture effect on dielectric strength of transformer
oil using VDE electrodes, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-101, No. 3, March 1982, pp. 751–756.
17. Zein El-Dine, M.E. and Tropper, H. The electric strength of transformer oil,
Proceedings IEE, Vol. 103, Pt. C, 1956, pp. 35–45.
18. Maier, G. The electric strength of insulating oil with power-frequency voltage, switching surges and standard impulses, The Brown Boveri Review, Vol.
54, No. 7, July 1967, pp. 368–376.
19. Kamata, Y. and Kako, Y. Flashover characteristics of extremely long gaps in
transformer oil under non-uniform field conditions, IEEE Transactions on
Electrical Insulation, Vol. EI-15, No. 1, February 1980, pp. 18–26.
20. Peek, F.W. The effect of transient voltages on dielectrics: Law of impulse
spark-over and time lag, AIEE Transactions, October 1930, pp. 1456–1469.
21. Blume, L.F., Boyajian, A., Camilli, G., Lennox, T.C., Minneci, S., and
Montsinger, V.M. Transformer engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York,
and Chapman and Hall, London, 1951.
22. Montsinger, V.M. Effects of time and frequency on insulation test of transformers, AIEE Transactions, Vol. 43, February 1924, pp. 337–347.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

364

Chapter 8

23. Vogel, F.J. Insulation tests of transformers as influenced by time and frequency,
AIEE Transactions, Vol. 43, February 1924, pp. 348–355.
24. Lokhanin, A.K., Morozova, T.I., Voevodin, I.D., Beletsky, Z.M., Kuchinsky,
G.S., and Kaplan, D.A. Problems of coordination of dielectric strength of extra
high-voltage power transformer major insulation, CIGRE 1970, Paper No.
12–06.
25. Vogel, F.J. Factors influencing the insulation coordination of transformers,
AIEE Transactions, June 1933, pp. 411–416.
26. Montsinger, V.M. Coordination of power transformers for steep-front impulse
waves, AIEE Transactions—Electrical Engineering, Vol. 57, April 1938, pp.
183–195.
27. Bellaschi, P.L. and Teague, W.L. Dielectric strength of transformer insulation,
AIEE Transactions—Electrical Engineering, January 1937, pp. 164–171.
28. Ikeda, M., Yanari, T., and Okubo, H. PD and BD probability distribution and
equi-probabilistic V-t characteristics of oil-filled transformer insulation, IEEE
Transaction on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-101, No. 8, August
1982, pp. 2728–2735.
29. Kamata, Y., Endoh, K., Furukawa, S., Endoh, F., Nonomura, K., Iwata, Y.,
Horiuchi, S., and Takasu, N. Dielectric strength of oil-immersed transformer
insulation with superimposed AC and lightning impulse voltage, IEEE Transaction on Electrical Insulation, Vol. 25, No. 4, August 1990, pp. 683–687.
30. Vandermaar, A.J., Wang., M., Neilson, J.B., and Srivastava, K.D. The electrical
breakdown characteristics of oil-paper insulation under steep front impulse
voltages, IEEE Transaction on Power Delivery, Vol. 9, No. 4, October 1994,
pp. 1926–1933.
31. Breitfelder, D., Buckow, E., Knorr, W., and Peschke, W. Dielectric strength of
transformer oil under impulse and high frequency voltage stress, International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, ISH’87, Braunschweig, Germany, August 1987.
32. Rasaruk. M. and Petcharaks, K. Thermal effect on AC breakdown characteristic of transformer oil under inhomogeneous fields, IEEE Power Engineering
Society Winter Meeting, 2000, Vol. 3, 23–27 January 2000, pp. 2176–2180.
33. Clark, F.M. Insulating materials for design and engineering practice, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1962.
34. Clark, F.M. and Montsinger, V.M. Dielectric strength—thickness relation in
fibrous insulation, General Electric Review, Vol. 28, No. 5, May 1925, pp.
286–290.
35. Wilson, W.R. A fundamental factor controlling the unit dielectric strength of
oil, AIEE Transactions, February 1953, pp. 68–74.
36. Hill, L.R. and Schmidt, P.L. Insulation breakdown as a function of area, AIEE
Transactions, Vol. 67, 1948, pp. 442–446.
37. Ikeda, M., Teranishi, T., Honda, M., and Yanari, T. Breakdown characteristics
of moving transformer oil, IEEE Transaction on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-100, No. 2, February 1981, pp. 921–928.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Insulation Design

365

38. Kato, K., Han, X., and Okubo, H. Insulation optimization by electrode contour modification based on breakdown area/volume effects, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, Vol. 8, No. 2, April 2001, pp.
162–167.
39. Anderson, J.G. and Liao, T.W. The propagation mechanism of impulse creepage discharges over oil-immersed surfaces, AIEE Transactions, May 1955,
pp. 218–226.
40. Okubo, H., Okamura, K., Ikeda, M., and Yanabu, S. Creepage flashover characteristics of oil/pressboard interfaces and their scale effects, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-2, No. 1, January 1987, pp. 126–132.
41. Anker, M.U. Effect of test geometry, permittivity matching and metal particles on the flashover voltage of oil/solid interfaces, IEEE Transactions on
Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-102, No. 12, December 1983, pp.
3796–3802.
42. Taylor, R.J. Effect of permittivity matching on the flashover of solid/liquid
interfaces, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 124, No. 10, October 1977, pp. 899–904.
43. Kamata, Y., Ohe, E., Endoh, K., Furukawa, S., Tsukioka, H., Maejima, M.,
Fujita, H., Nozaki, M., Ishizuka, F., and Hyohdoh, K. Development of lowpermittivity pressboard and its evaluation for insulation of oil-immersed EHV
power transformers, IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation, Vol. 26, No.
4, August 1991, pp. 819–825.
44. Nelson, J.K. Some steps toward the automation of the design of composite
dielectric structures, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, Vol. 1, No. 4, August 1994, pp. 663–671.
45. Derler, F., Kirch, H.J., Krause, C., and Schneider, E. Development of a design
method for insulating structures exposed to electric stress in long oil gaps and
along oil/transformerboard surfaces, International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, ISH’91, Dresden, Germany, August 1991.
46. Moser, H.P. Transformerboard, Scientia Electrica, 1979.
47. Tschudi, D.J. AC insulation design: paper-oil insulation systems, WICOR Insulation Conference, Rapperswil, Switzerland, September 1996.
48. Dahinden, V., Schultz, K., and Kuchler, A. Function of solid insulation in
transformers, TRANSFORM 98, April 1998, Germany, pp. 41–54.
49. Aubin, J. and Malewski, R. Safety margin of internal insulation of EHV power
transformers, International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, ISH’95,
Graz, Austria, August 1995.
50. Grieder, H. Drying transformers with kerosene vapour, Brown Boveri Review,
2/3–73, 1973, pp. 117–122.
51. Kawamura, T. Proposals on standardization on the site installation to secure
the reliability of transformer insulation, CIGRE 1976, Paper 12–01.
52. Weidmann, H. Catalogue, pp. A41–5, A41–6.
53. Lakhiani, V.K. and Kulkarni, S.V. Insulation design of EHV transformers—a
review, International Insulation Conference, INSUCON 2002, Berlin, Germany, June 2002, pp. 283–287.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

366

Chapter 8

54. Tschudi, D., Dahinden, V., and Derler, F. Dielectric strength assessment of
power transformer insulation, International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, ISH’95, Graz, Austria, August 1995.
55. Vailles, C., Malewski, R., Dia-Do, X., and Aubin, J. Measurement of dielectric
stress in EHV transformer insulation, CIGRE 1994, WG 33.03.
56. Kawaguchi, Y., Murata, H., and Ikeda, M. Breakdown of transformer oil, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-91, January/February 1972, pp. 9–19.
57. Palmer, S. and Sharpley, W.A. Electric strength of transformer insulation, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 116, No. 12, December 1969, pp. 2029–2037.
58. Ikeda, M. and Menju, S. Breakdown probability distribution on
equiprobabilistic V-T characteristics of transformer oil, IEEE Transaction on
Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-98, No. 4, July–August 1979, pp.
1430–1437.
59. Rengarajan, S. and Satyanarayana, S. Computation and analysis of HV lead
clearance to tank wall in large power transformers using stressed oil volume
concept, International Symposium on High Voltage Engineering, ISH’95,
Graz, Austria, August 1995, pp. 1042:1–4.
60. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., and Dubey, A.K. Optimization of EHV Transformer Insulation by Statistical Analysis, International Symposium on High
Voltage Engineering, ISH’97, Montreal, August 1997, Vol. 6, pp. 289–292.
61. Phadke, M.S. Quality engineering using robust design, Prentice-Hall International, Inc, 1989.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

9
Cooling Systems

The magnetic circuit and windings are the principal sources of losses and
resulting temperature rise in various parts of a transformer. Core loss, copper loss
in windings (I2R loss), stray loss in windings and stray loss due to leakage/high
current field are mainly responsible for heat generation within the transformer.
Sometimes loose electrical connections inside the transformer, leading to a high
contact resistance, cause higher temperatures. Excessive temperatures due to
heating of curb bolts, which are in the path of stray field, can damage gaskets
(refer to Chapter 5). The heat generated due to all these losses must be dissipated
without allowing the core, winding and structural parts to reach a temperature
which will cause deterioration of insulation. If the insulation is subjected to
temperatures higher than the allowed value for a long time, it looses insulating
properties; in other words the insulation gets aged, severely affecting the
transformer life. There are two principle characteristics of insulation: dielectric
strength and mechanical strength. The dielectric strength of insulation aged in oil
remains high up to a certain temperature after which it drops rapidly. At this point
the insulation material becomes brittle and looses its mechanical strength. Thus, it
is primarily the mechanical strength which gets affected by the higher
temperatures and aging, which in turn affects the dielectric strength. Hence, the
dielectric strength alone cannot always be depended upon for judging the effect of
temperature on the insulation [1].
Accurate estimation of temperatures on all surfaces is very critical in the design
of transformers to decide the operating flux density in core and current densities in
windings/connections. It helps in checking the adequacy of cooling arrangements
provided for the core and windings. It also helps in ensuring reliable operation of
the transformer since the insulation life can be estimated under overload
conditions and corrective actions can be taken in advance.

367
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

368

Chapter 9

The values of maximum oil and winding temperatures depend on the ambient
temperature, transformer design, loading conditions and cooling provided. The
limits for ambient temperature and the corresponding limits for oil temperature
rise and winding temperature rise are specified in the international standards. As
the ambient temperature varies from one country to another, the limits could be
different for different countries. For example in IEC 60076–2 (second edition:
1993), a maximum ambient temperature of 40°C is specified with a limit on top
oil temperature rise of 60°C. In a country where the maximum ambient
temperature is 50°C, the top oil temperature rise limit may be correspondingly
reduced to 50°C. If the installation site is more than 1000 m above the sea level,
the allowable temperature rise for transformers is reduced as per the guidelines
given in the standards because of the fact that air density reduces with the
increase in altitude lowering the effectiveness of cooling. Altitude basically
affects the convective heat transfer (because of lower buoyancy effect) and not
the radiation. A corresponding reverse correction is applied when the altitude of
factory location is above 1000 m and the altitude of installation site is below
1000 m.
In oil cooled transformers, the oil provides a medium for both cooling and
insulation. Heat from core, windings and structural components is dissipated by
means of the oil circulation. The heat is finally transmitted either to atmospheric
air or water. In the subsequent sections, modes of heat transfer and their
application in different cooling configurations in a transformer are discussed.

9.1 Modes of Heat Transfer
The heat transfer mechanism in a transformer takes place by three modes, viz.
conduction, convection and radiation. In the oil cooled transformers, convection
plays the most important role and conduction the least important. Rigorous
mathematical treatment for expressing these modes of heat transfer is quite
difficult and hence designers mostly rely on empirical formulae.
9.1.1 Conduction
Almost all the types of transformers are either oil or gas filled, and heat flows from
the core and windings into the cooling medium. From the core, heat can flow
directly, but from the winding it flows through the insulation provided on the
winding conductor. In large transformers, at least one side of insulated conductors
is exposed to the cooling medium, and the heat flows through a small thickness of
the conductor insulation. But in small transformers the heat may have to flow
through several layers of copper and insulation before reaching the cooling
medium.
The temperature drop across the insulation due to the conduction heat transfer
mechanism can be calculated by the basic thermal law:

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

369

Δθ=Q×RT

(9.1)

where Q is heat flow (power loss) in W and RT is thermal resistance in °C/W. The
thermal resistance is given by
(9.2)
where ti is the insulation thickness in m, A is cross-sectional area in m2, and k is
thermal conductivity in W/(m °C). If q denotes heat flux per unit transfer area, the
temperature drop across the insulation can be rewritten as
(9.3)
It should be noted that the thermal conductivity of oil-impregnated paper
insulation is temperature dependent and its proper value should be taken in the
calculations [2].
9.1.2 Radiation
Any body, at a raised temperature compared to its surroundings, radiates heat
energy in the form of waves. The heat dissipation from a transformer tank occurs
by means of both radiation and natural convection. The cooling of radiators also
occurs by radiation, but it is far less as compared to that by convection. Because of
closeness of radiator fins, the entire radiator surface does not participate in the
heat transfer mechanism by radiation. Thus, the effective area for radiation can be
taken as the outside envelope surface of the radiator. Therefore, for the case of
tank with radiators connected to it, actual radiating surface area is that area on
which a tightly stretched string would lie. The emissivity of the radiating surface
affects the radiation. The heat transfer in watts by radiation is expressed by the
Stephan-Boltzmann law:
(9.4)
where η=5.67×10-8W/(m2 °K4) is the Stephan-Boltzmann constant, E is surface
emissivity factor, AR is surface area for radiation in m2, Ts is average temperature of
radiating surface in °K, and Ta is ambient air temperature in °K.
Surface emissivity is a property, which depends on several factors like surface
finish, type of paint applied on the surface, etc. When the emissivity factor is less
than unity, the effective radiating surface is correspondingly less (as indicated by
the above equation). For tank and radiators painted with grey colour having
emissivity of 0.95, the effective radiating area is usually assumed to be that of
outside envelope without introducing much error.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

370

Chapter 9

9.1.3 Convection
The oil, being a liquid, has one important mechanical property that its volume
changes with temperature and pressure [3]. The change of volume with
temperature provides the essential convective or thermosiphon cooling. The
change of volume with pressure affects the amount of transferred vibrations from
the core to tank.
The heat dissipation from the core and windings occurs mainly due to
convection. When a heated surface is immersed in a fluid, heat flows from the
surface to the cooling medium. Due to increase in the fluid temperature, its
density (or specific gravity) reduces. The fluid (oil) in oil-cooled transformers,
rises upwards and transfers its heat to outside ambient through tank and
radiators. The rising oil is replaced by the colder oil from the bottom, and thus
the continuous oil circulation occurs. The convective heat transfer is expressed
by the relationship:
Q=hA(Tsurface-Tfluid)

(9.5)

where Q is heat flow in W, h is heat transfer coefficient in W/(m2 °C), A is surface
area in m2, and temperatures Tsurface and Tfluid are in °C. Since h depends on both
geometry as well as fluid properties, its estimation is very difficult. However, a lot
of empirical correlations are available, which can be used in majority of design
calculations. In one such correlation, the heat dissipated per unit surface area is
expressed as equal to a constant multiplied by temperature rise raised to an
empirical coefficient.
The heat dissipation from the transformer tank to ambient air occurs similarly
but the warmed air after cooling does not come back and its place is occupied by
new quantity of fresh air. In the case of tank, heat dissipation by convection and
radiation mechanisms are comparable since the surface area available for the
convective cooling is same as that for the radiation cooling. The heat dissipated by
the tank through the convection and radiation is also usually calculated by
empirical relations in which the resultant effect of both the mechanisms is taken
into account.

9.2 Cooling Arrangements
9.2.1 ONAN/OA cooling
In small rating transformers, the tank surface area may be able to dissipate heat
directly to the atmosphere; while the bigger rating transformers usually require
much larger dissipating surface in the form of radiators/tubes mounted directly on
the tank or mounted on a separate structure. If the number of radiators is small,
they are preferably mounted directly on the tank so that it results in smaller overall
dimensions.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

371

Figure 9.1 ONAN cooling

When number of radiators is large, they are mounted on a separate structure and
the arrangement is called as radiator bank. The radiators are mounted on headers,
which are supported from the ground. In this case, strict dimensional control of
pipes and other fittings is required in order to avoid oil leakages.
Oil is kept in circulation by the gravitational buoyancy in the closed-loop
cooling system as shown in figure 9.1. The heat developed in active parts is passed
on to the surrounding oil through the surface transfer (convection) mechanism.
The oil temperature increases and its specific gravity drops, due to which it flows
upwards and then into the coolers. The oil heat gets dissipated along the colder
surfaces of the coolers which increases its specific gravity, and it flows
downwards and enters the transformer tank from the inlet at the bottom level.
Since the heat dissipation from the oil to atmospheric air is by natural means (the
circulation mechanism for oil is the natural thermosiphon flow in the cooling
equipment and windings), the cooling is termed as ONAN (Oil Natural and Air
Natural) or OA type of cooling.
In the arrangement consisting of radiator banks, higher thermal head can be
achieved by adjusting the height of support structures. The thermal head can be
defined as the difference between the centers of gravity of fluids in the tank and
radiator bank. Although it is difficult to get higher thermal head for the case of
tank mounted radiators, reasonable amount of thermal head is achieved by the
arrangement shown in figure 9.2. When the radiators are mounted at higher
height, the buoyancy effect on the cooling-loop increases resulting in increase
of the rate of oil flow and heat dissipation in the cooling equipment. However,
it is to be noted that the increase in flow rate results in increased frictional
pressure loss, thereby offsetting the thermal head gained by the height
difference.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

372

Chapter 9

Figure 9.2 Arrangement for higher thermal head

9.2.2 ONAF/FA cooling
As the transformer rating increases, the total loss to be dissipated also increases.
One way of increasing the heat transfer is to increase the heat transfer coefficient
between the radiator outside surface and air (equation 9.5). In this equation, for a
radiator Tsurface corresponds to its outside wall surface temperature. However, the
temperature drop across the radiator plate is very small, hence Tsurface can be
considered as the oil temperature itself. If fans are used to blow air on to the
cooling surfaces of the radiators, the heat transfer coefficient is significantly
increased. For a given set of ambient air temperature and oil temperature, a
compact arrangement is possible since less number of radiators is required to cool
the oil. This type of cooling is termed as ONAF (Oil Natural and Air Forced) or FA
type of cooling.
If there is a particular case in which either ONAN or mixed ONAN/ONAF
cooling can be specified; the ONAN cooling has the following advantages
(although it may take more space):
-

it is more reliable as no cooler controls are involved and it requires less
maintenance.
the cost increase due to extra radiators is, to a large extent, compensated by
the reduction in cost due to the absence of fans and control system.
it is particularly useful when low noise transformers are required. Absence of
fans makes it easier to achieve the required low noise level.
there is no cooler loss.
winding losses also reduce (although marginally) because of lower winding

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

373

temperature rise at fractions of rated load as compared to the mixed cooling.
most of the time, when load on the transformer is less than its full rating,
temperature rise inside the transformer is low and its life increases (gain of
life).
Thus, in cases where the ONAN rating is 75% or more (it is closer to the ONAF
rating), ONAN cooling can be specified instead of mixed ONAN/ONAF cooling
based on cost-benefit analysis.
There are two typical configurations for mounting fans in ONAF cooling. One
method is to mount the fans below the radiators, which blow air from bottom to
top. Larger capacity fans can be used since it is easy to design the support
structures for them. In this system the fans can be either supported directly from
the radiators or they can be ground mounted. Care should be taken that the fans
mounted on radiators do not produce appreciable vibrations. Usually, sufficient
surface of radiators is covered in the air-flow cone created by the fan; the
remaining surface is taken to be naturally cooled. In the second method, fans are
mounted on the side of radiators. These fans are relatively smaller in size
compared to the first arrangement since the number of fans is usually more for this
configuration. Both the configurations have their own advantages and
disadvantages, particular selection depends on the specific design requirement.
9.2.3 OFAF/FOA cooling
As discussed previously, the flow rate inside the windings under ONAN and
ONAF cooling arrangements is governed by the natural balance between the
viscous resistance and the thermosiphon pressure head. Normally this flow rate is
relatively low. Because of this, the heat carrying (or dissipating) capacity of the oil
is low. The heat carrying capacity can be defined as
(9.6)
where Q is heat flow in W, m is mass flow rate in kg/s, Cp is specific heat in J/(kg
°C), and temperatures Tout and Tin are in °C. For the given transformer oil inlet (Tin)
and top oil (Tout) temperatures, the only way to increase the heat dissipation
capability is to increase This necessitates the use of an external pump to circulate
the oil in high rating transformers. Also, in order to get a higher heat transfer rate,
fans have to be always operating at the radiator sections m. This type of cooling is
called as OFAF (Oil Forced and Air Forced) or FOA cooling. There are basically
two types of pump designs: axial flow in-line type and radial flow type for
circulating oil against low and high frictional head losses respectively. The axial
flow type is used with mixed cooling (ONAN/ ONAF/OFAF) since it offers less
resistance when switched-off. The radial flow type pumps, which offer very high
resistance to oil flow under the switched-off condition, are used with oil-to-air
heat exchangers (unit cooler arrangement) or oil-to-water heat exchangers in

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

374

Chapter 9

which no natural cooling is provided. The head required to be developed for these
two types of compact heat exchangers is quite high and the radial flow pump can
cater to this requirement quite well.
In OFAF cooling arrangement, when fans are mounted on the sides of
radiators, they should be uniformly distributed over the radiator height, whereas
for ONAF cooling more fans should be mounted at the top of radiator height. This
is because in OFAF condition, the temperature difference between top and bottom
portions of radiators is small as compared to that under ONAF condition.
When the oil is forced into the transformer (figure 9.3), its flow is governed by
the least resistance path as well as the buoyancy. Hence, part of the oil may not
enter either windings or core, and may form a parallel path outside these two.
Thus, the top oil temperature may reduce because of the mixture of hot oil coming
from the windings and the cool oil coming from the pump. This in turn reduces the
effectiveness of radiators. The heat dissipation rate can be improved if the oil is
forced (by use of pumps) and directed in the windings through the predetermined
paths as shown in figure 9.4. This type of cooling is termed as ODAF (Oil Directed
and Air Forced) type of cooling. ODAF type of cooling is used in most of the large
rating power transformers. One disadvantage of ODAF cooling is the increased
pressure loss because of the ducting system used for directing the oil flow. For
each winding, the oil flow rate is required to be determined accurately. In the
absence of proper oil flow rates, an unreasonable temperature rise will result.
Additionally, any blockage or failure of the ducting system leads to higher
temperature rise.
Generally, the higher the pump capacity (and the greater the oil velocity) the
higher the rate of heat dissipation is. Hence, during the early development, there
was a general trend for using higher capacity pumps permitting higher loss density
(use of higher current density in windings and/or higher flux density in core),
leading to lower material cost and size of transformers. The trend continued till a
number of large transformers failed due to the phenomenon called static
electrification (explained in Section 9.6). Hence, the oil pump capacity should be
judiciously selected.

Figure 9.3 OFAF cooling

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Figure 9.4 ODAF cooling

Cooling Systems

375

9.2.4 Unit coolers
As mentioned earlier, sometimes OFAF cooling is provided through the use of
compact heat exchangers when there is space constraint at site. In this small box
type structure, an adequate surface area is provided by means of finned tubes.
Usually, about 20% standby cooling capacity is provided. Disadvantage of these
coolers is that there is only one rating available (with running of fans and pumps).
If the system of fans and pumps fails (e.g., failure of auxiliary supply), ONAN
rating is not available. Hence, the continuity of auxiliary supply to fans and pumps
is required to be ensured.
9.2.5 OFWF cooling
For most of the transformers installed in hydropower stations, where there is
abundance of water, oil-to-water heat exchangers are used. As the surface heat
transfer coefficient of water is more than air, such type of cooling results in
smaller radiators. This type of cooling is termed as water forced (WF) cooling.
Depending on the type of oil circulation, the transformer cooling system is termed
as OFWF or ODWF type of cooling. During operation, it is very important to
ensure that the oil pressure is always more than the water pressure so that the
possibility of water leaking into the oil is eliminated. A dedicated differential
pressure gauge and the corresponding protection circuit are used to trip the
transformer if a specific value of pressure difference between the oil and water is
not maintained during the operation.

9.3 Dissipation of Core Heat
As the transformer core size increases, it becomes more important to decide the
positions of cooling ducts in it. These cooling ducts (shown in figure 9.5) reduce
both the surface temperature rise of the core relative to that of oil and the
temperature rise of the interior of the core relative to that at the surface.

Figure 9.5 Core cooling ducts

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

376

Chapter 9

It is necessary to maximize core area (net iron area) to get an optimum design.
The cooling ducts reduce the core area, and hence their number should be as
minimum as necessary. This requires accurate determination of temperature
profile of the core and effective placement of the cooling ducts. The complicated
geometry of the boundary surface between the core and oil, and the anisotropy of
the thermal conductivity of the laminated core are some of the complexities
involved in the computations. A general formulation of the approximated twodimensional problem of temperature distribution in rectangular cores subjected to
linear boundary conditions (thermal resistance being independent of heat flow and
oil temperature) is given in [4]. The method described in [5] solves the twodimensional problem by transforming Poisson’s equation of heat conduction into
Laplace’s equation. The method can be applied to any arbitrary shape due to use of
a functional approximation. The paper also reports the use of electrical analog
method which uses the analogy between electrical potential difference and
temperature difference, between electrical current and heat flow, and between
electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity. The calculation of temperature
distribution in the transformer core is a complex three-dimensional problem with
non-uniform heat generation. Furthermore, the thermal properties of core are
anisotropic in the sense that the thermal conductivity along the plane of
laminations is quite different from that across them. The problem can be solved by
using three-dimensional finite element thermal formulation with the anisotropic
thermal material properties taken into account.
The surface of core is normally in contact with the insulation (between core
and frame). Hence, the limit on the core surface temperature is the same as that for
the windings. For the interior portions of the core which are in contact with only
the oil (film), the limit is 140°C. In most cases, the temperature difference
between the core interior (e.g., mid-location between two cooling ducts) and
surface is about 15 to 20°C.

9.4 Dissipation of Winding Heat
Radial spacers (pressboard insulations between disks/turns) cover about 30 to
40% of the winding surface, making the covered area ineffective for the
convective cooling. The arrangement is shown in figure 9.6. Thus, although higher
spacer width may be required from the short circuit withstand considerations, it is
counterproductive for cooling. Hence, while calculating the gradients, only the
uncovered winding surface area is taken into account.
Heat from the covered winding area is transferred to the uncovered area by
thermal conduction process increasing thermal load on the uncovered surfaces.
Contrary to the width of radial spacer, cooling is improved with the increase in its
thickness. Hence, radial spacers may not be required from insulation
considerations in low voltage windings, but they are essential for providing the
cooling ducts.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

377

Figure 9.6 Effect of radial spacers on cooling

The required spacer thickness bears a specific relationship with the radial depth of
winding. For a given radial depth, a certain minimum thickness of radial spacers is
required for effective cooling (otherwise resistance to oil flow in the duct between
two disks/turns is higher and the oil largely flows through the axial ducts at inside
and outside diameters resulting in higher temperature rise at the middle portion of
the radial depth).
When the winding radial depth is quite high, the usual practice of providing
two axial ducts at the inside and outside diameters (along with the radial ducts)
may not be enough. Hence, some manufacturers provide an additional axial
cooling duct in the middle of the radial depth as shown in figure 9.7, so that the
thickness of the radial spacers can be lower. With this arrangement, the axial space
factor of the winding improves (due to reduction of insulation along the winding
height), but the radial space factor worsens. Hence, the design and dimensioning
of the axial and radial spacers have to be judiciously done, which may also depend
on the manufacturing practices.
Axial ducts play an important role in dissipation of heat from the windings. The
higher the axial duct width, the better the oil flow conditions are; this is more valid
for windings without radial ducts. In large transformers with radial cooling ducts
between disks/turns, thicknesses of the axial ducts (at the inside and outside
diameters of the winding) and radial ducts decide the oil velocity within the
winding and the rate of heat dissipation.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

378

Chapter 9

Figure 9.7 Axial cooling ducts

The axial duct at the winding outside diameter is usually of the order of 10 to
12 mm, whereas the duct at the winding inside diameter is kept equal to or below
8 mm from the dielectric strength consideration (as explained in Chapter 8). Thus,
the thermal and dielectric requirements are in conflict while designing the
thickness of the inner axial duct. The size of axial duct less than 6 mm is not
preferred from the thermal consideration. Narrow ducts or manufacturing
deficiencies result in higher flow resistance, thereby leading to an unacceptable
temperature rise within the winding.
In power transformers, a guided oil flow is commonly used to cool the
windings effectively. The oil guiding is achieved by use of washers as shown in
figure 9.8. The washers have to be accurately cut to the required dimensions so
that there is proper sealing at the desired locations eliminating oil leakages. If oil
guiding strips are used, they have to be securely held to the innermost conductor
(sealing at the inside diameter) or the outermost conductor (sealing at the outside
diameter) along the circumference. The location and number of these oil guiding
components have to be properly selected. Oil flow through multiple passages has
been studied in [6], in which the oil flow rates are shown to be different in upper
ducts as compared to lower ducts. Similar trends are reported in [7] for SF6 flow
rate in gas cooled transformers. The effects of number of radial ducts between two
consecutive oil guiding washers, width of radial duct and width of axial duct on
the value of hot spot temperature have been reported in [8] based on a number of
FEM simulations.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

379

Figure 9.8 Directed oil flow in a winding

When winding gradients are calculated by simple formulae, average loss per
disk (in disk winding) or per turn (in layer winding) is considered, which is
calculated by adding the average eddy loss in the disk or turn to its I2R loss. The
effects of winding curvature can be neglected. The average temperature rise of the
winding above the average oil temperature is then calculated as the sum of the
temperature drop across the conductor paper insulation and the surface
temperature drop. It is to be noted that the heat flux per unit surface area used in
these calculations should be determined by considering only the exposed
horizontal surface area of the winding (not covered by the radial spacers).
Although the temperature rise calculations in transformers have been heavily
relying on empirical factors, there have been continuous efforts for determining
the temperatures through accurate formulations. Equations governing the
distributions of interlayer temperature and duct-oil velocity under thermal and
hydrodynamic conditions are derived in [9] for layer-type transformer winding. A
resistive-network analog computer has been used in the iterative solution of
equations. Numerical solution using finite difference method is presented in [10]
for disk-type transformer winding. A general network method is described in [11],
in which interconnecting flow paths or ducts are represented by a network
diagram, each element of which corresponds to a single path with nodes placed at
the junctions. Solution is obtained by a numerical procedure which predicts the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

380

Chapter 9

temperature distribution in ducts. The temperature distribution in the winding
does not vary linearly with its height as usually assumed. Variation in temperature
with winding height is close to the linear distribution in forced oil cooling,
whereas for naturally oil cooled transformers (ONAN and ONAF) it can be quite
nonlinear [12].

9.5 Aging and Life Expectancy
As explained earlier, the insulation properties and hence the life of a transformer is
basically decided by the mechanical strength of insulation under the normal aging
process. Brittleness in the paper insulation is strongly conducive to dielectric
failure by various mechanisms. The period of time, until deterioration of an
insulating material becomes critical, is called the service life or life expectancy.
The service life of a transformer can be calculated by using the Montsinger
formula applicable to the 80 to 140°C range of temperatures,
(9.7)
where D is a constant expressed in years, p is a constant expressed in °C-1, and θ is
temperature in °C. It is generally recognized that the rate of aging as measured by
tensile strength of class A insulation doubles for each 5 to 10°C increase in
temperature [1]. It was reported in year 1930 [13] that the aging of tensile strength
gets doubled for approximately each 8°C increase in the temperature. Subsequent
tests reported [14] on paper insulation confirmed this aging rate. During
discussions in CIGRE Transformer Working Group in 1961, 6°C was considered
to be a more correct value [15] and is now used widely by transformer designers
and users.
Hence, for the temperature range of 80 to 140°C, the life expectancy is taken to
be halved for the increase in temperature of 6°C. This means that if a service life of
N years applies for a temperature θ°C, the temperature of (θ+6) °C will reduce the
life by (N/2) years. With these figures, the constant P in the Montsinger formula
can now be determined. Rewriting equation 9.7 as
(9.8)
(9.9)
and taking the ratio of the above two equations we get

(9.10)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

381

If the life expectancy at some temperature θb is chosen to be normal, then that
applicable to an arbitrary temperature θ can be related to this normal life
expectancy. The ratio of these two life expectancies is called as aging factor or
relative reduction of life, and is given using the Montsinger relation as
(9.11)

The maximum limits on current and temperature are given in standards, which are
applicable to loading beyond the nameplate rating. For example, as per the IEC
standard 60354:1991, the limits are given separately for three categories of
transformers: distribution, medium power and large power transformers. For each
of these, the limits are specified for three types of loadings, viz. normal cyclic
loading, long-time emergency cyclic loading and short-time emergency loading.
The limits are lower for large power transformers. Under normal cyclic loading
conditions a current of 150% of the rated value and hot spot temperature of 140°C
for metallic parts in contact with insulating material are allowed for distribution
and medium power transformers, whereas for large power transformers the
corresponding limits are 130% and 120°C. For all transformers the top oil
temperature limit of 105°C is specified under normal cyclic loading conditions,
whereas the limit of 115°C is specified for long-time emergency cyclic loading
and short-time emergency loading.
Pure oil, free from impurities and sealed from the atmosphere, can withstand
temperature up to 140°C [3] which is the flash point of oil. Generally, the
temperature of structural components and other metallic parts should be limited
up to 135 to 140°C, provided this temperature occurs over a small surface area of
few cm2 which is in contact with a bulk quantity of oil [2].
It is generally accepted that a continuous operation with the hot spot
temperature of 98°C results into the normal use of life or rate of degradation. This
is the temperature at which the insulation of a transformer deteriorates at the
normal rate. Thus, if we choose 98°C as the temperature corresponding to the
normal life expectancy (IEC standard 60354:1991), then the aging factor
applicable to an arbitrary temperature θ can be given as
Kag=e0.1155(θ-98)

(912)

If the ambient temperature (θa) is appreciably varying during the period under
consideration, the weighted ambient temperature should be taken for the hot spot
temperature calculation. The weighted ambient temperature θ awt is that
temperature which lasts for the same time t and causes the same loss of expectancy
as the ambient temperature θa(t) which is varying in magnitude with time. For
equal reduction of life expectancy the following equation holds

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

382

Chapter 9

(9.13)
The weighted ambient temperature can be fixed once for all in the given climatic
conditions. This temperature, when calculated by equation 9.13, is such that the
extra loss of life during the summer season is compensated by the gain in life in
the winter season.
The temperature rise limits set by the standards are in line with the hot spot
limit for the normal aging of a transformer. The hot spot limit of 98°C is applicable
to the average winding temperature rise of 55°C above ambient temperature (for
transformers without thermally upgraded insulation). The corresponding limit is
95°C as per the IEEE standard C57.91:1995. As per this standard the limit is
110°C for a thermally upgraded insulation (for transformers with 65°C average
winding rise), i.e., the maximum (hottest spot) winding temperature rise of 80°C
is allowed above the average ambient temperature of 30°C for the normal aging.
The steady-state hot spot temperature is calculated as the sum of ambient
external cooling medium temperature, temperature rise of top oil above the
cooling medium and hot spot winding gradient. Let us assume that the hot spot
gradient is 1.1 times the average gradient (which is the difference between the
average winding temperature rise and average oil temperature rise). For yearly
weighted average ambient temperature of 20°C, and top oil rise and average
winding rise limits of 60°C and 65°C respectively (as per IEC standard 60076–2:
1993), the hot spot temperature is
hot spot temperature
where the average oil temperature rise is taken as 80% of the top oil temperature
rise, which is usually true for the natural oil circulation. For forced oil condition,
the hot spot temperature is lower since the average oil temperature rise is closer to
the top oil temperature rise. Thus, it can be seen that if the temperature rise of oil
and windings are within the limits set by the standards, the hot spot temperature
will not be exceeded and a certain transformer life (of few decades), with the
normal aging process, can be expected. If the hot spot gradient is 1.3 times the
average gradient, the top oil rise and average winding rise should be lower so that
the hot spot temperature limit is not exceeded. Thus, based on the calculated value
hot spot gradient, designer may have to limit the top oil rise and average winding
rise values.
Example 9.1
The loading of a transformer is such that the hot spot temperature does not exceed
92°C for 18 hours in a day. For remaining 6 hours, during peak load periods, the
transformer can be overloaded. What will be the temperature corresponding to the
allowed overload condition?

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

383

Solution:
Here, the objective is to have a normal use of life over the whole period of the day.
Transformer gains life during the lower load period of 18 hours and this gain of
life can be utilized to allow an overload. The temperature θ during the overload
period of 6 hours is given by

If the thermal time constant of the transformer is considered, the duration of the
overload can be higher than the one calculated above. The usual values of thermal
time constants for transformers lie in the range of 1 hour to 8 hours; smaller values
are for the forced cooled and larger values are for the naturally cooled
transformers. The thermal time constants of windings considered alone are much
smaller (in the range of few minutes to tens of minutes).
Example 9.2
Estimate the relative extent of insulation aging of the transformer winding
subjected to a temperature of 136°C for 3 hours during a day.
Solution:
The aging factor calculated by equation 9.11 is
Kag=e0.1155(136–98)=80.6
Hence, the operation of the transformer at 136°C for 3 hours is equivalent to
3×80.6=241.8 hours (approximately 10 days) of operation with the normal aging
process.
Here again, the thermal time constant is ignored which results into a very
conservative calculation. For accurate calculations the IEC standard 60354:1991
or IEEE standard C57.91:1995 can be used.
It is well-known that the paper aging is highly dependent on temperature and
the presence of water and oxygen. The thermally upgraded paper is less affected
by the presence of water and oxygen as compared to the normal paper, and hence
its use is technically beneficial [16]. The thermally upgraded paper can be used for
increasing the overloading capability and life of a transformer. Many transformer
manufacturers are using it but the use is still not widespread. Furfural analysis of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

384

Chapter 9

commonly available thermally upgraded kraft papers has been reported in [17]; it
is suggested to have a detailed knowledge of the thermally upgraded paper and its
behavior during the aging process before its use is made in transformers.
Most of the earlier work is based on the use of tensile strength as a measure to
assess the remaining useful life; reduction of tensile strength to 50% of its original
value is used as the criterion. The more precise DP (degree of polymerization)
method, which is now widely getting acceptance, can give the same information
more conveniently.
Transformers subjected to a non-sinusoidal duty deserve special attention. The
hot spot temperature and loss of life should be accurately estimated [18]. A
suitable derating factor has to be used to compensate the effects of harmonics.

9.6 Direct Hot Spot Measurement
The rate of deterioration of the winding insulation increases as the conductor
temperature increases. Hence, it is necessary to know the hottest conductor
temperature in order to ensure a reasonable and expected life for the insulation and
the transformer. The oil temperature is higher at the top. Also, there is usually
higher loss density in the winding at the top because of eddy loss due to radial
leakage field. In addition, an extra insulation may have been provided to line end
turns at the top. All these reasons lead to having the hot spot at disks/ turns in the
top portion of the winding. The hot spot is usually assumed to be present at the
second disk/turn from the top. The hot spot winding gradient can be about 1.1 to
1.3 times the average winding gradient over the average oil rise. The winding
temperature is traditionally measured by a winding temperature indicator (WTI)
which uses the principle of thermal imaging. Thermometer type sensor placed in a
tank pocket, which measures the hot oil temperature at the top of tank, is
surrounded by a heater coil carrying a current in proportion of load current. After
proper adjustment of settings, the device reads the hot spot temperature of the
winding. The settings are specified by designers based on the calculated value of
the hot spot gradient. Since the actual value of hot spot gradient is a function of
many design and manufacturing parameters, viz. winding eddy loss density,
effectiveness of cooling ducts provided, etc., the accuracy of winding hot spot
temperature measurement by WTI may not always be good. Hence, the direct hot
spot measurement technique is being increasingly specified and used by
transformer users. In this method a sensor, made of photo-luminescent material
and attached to the end of optical fiber, is in thermal contact with the winding. The
sensor is usually placed between insulated conductor and radial spacer. The fiberoptic cable is brought out of the tank up to the instrument through a hole made in
the tank with a proper oil-sealing arrangement. A pulse of light from the light
emitting diode (LED) in the instrument is sent to the sensor through the fiber-optic
cable, which stimulates the sensor material to fluoresce. Depending on the decay
time of the returning fluorescent signal, which is a function of conductor

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

385

temperature, the instrument calculates and displays the corresponding hot spot
temperature by lookup table approach. By using the fiber-optic sensor, accurate
measurement of hot spot temperature can be done but the sensor insertion method
is critical. The requirements of the measurement system are: the sensor should be
sufficiently small, signal transmission system should not degrade dielectric
strength of the transformer, and the components used should withstand thermal,
mechanical, and chemical rigors of the transformer environment [19].
It is important to accurately calculate the loss density and the corresponding
gradients at various critical locations in windings and thereafter predict the
locations of hot spots. The hot spot temperatures measured at these locations by
direct hot spot measurement technique should be reasonably close to the
calculated values. The accurate calculation of hot spot temperature is complicated
by the fact that the resistivity of winding conductor changes as the temperature
along the winding height changes. The I2 R loss of the winding is directly
proportional to resistivity, whereas the winding eddy loss is inversely proportional
to resistivity. Hence, generally as the oil temperature increases from bottom to top,
the I2 R loss increases while the eddy loss tends to reduce. Since the I2 R loss is the
dominant component, losses are higher at the top. Stray leakage field and
corresponding winding eddy losses are different along the winding radial depth,
as explained in Chapter 4, and this variation should be taken into account during
the accurate calculation of hot spot temperatures.

9.7 Static Electrification Phenomenon
Generation of static charges, caused by oil streaming on a solid insulation, is
responsible for streaming or static electrification phenomenon in the transformers.
This phenomenon occurs due to the friction between the oil and solid dielectric
components of the transformer. Depending on the type of oil and its velocity, high
levels of localized electrostatic charges (due to charge separation) can be
generated leading to very high voltage inside the transformer. This overvoltage,
depending on where it occurs inside the transformer, could trigger a sequence of
electrical discharges and arcing. Failures in some of the large high voltage
transformers and autotransformers have been attributed to the occurrence of
electrostatic charges. When the voltage and power ratings of the transformer
increase, tendency is to use higher rate of oil flow for the cooling purpose and to
improve the insulation resistance. From the standpoint of static electrification,
these improvements result in increase of charging tendency. The accumulation
of charges leads to production of a strong DC field, which may stress the
insulation to an unacceptable level. If high voltage transformers are
manufactured with reduced dimensions and kg per MVA value, chances of
electrostatic charging are higher. The reduction in the weight to power ratio
usually results in greater oil velocity and more labyrinths aiding the static
electrification phenomenon.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

386

Chapter 9

When oil flows through insulation ducts, charge separation occurs at the
interface of the solid insulation and oil. The charge separation also occurs in the
other regions of the flow system such as radiator pipes and pumps. It has been
observed that the paper/pressboard insulation structure acquires a negative charge
and the oil carries a positive charge. The lower part of the insulation arrangement
(bottom end insulation) may accumulate a high negative charge leading to the
development of excessive DC voltage [20,21]. As the oil flows up through the
windings, it becomes more and more positively charged, and the upper tank may
act as a reservoir for the positive charge. There is charge relaxation in every part of
the flow system which mitigates the effect. The static charge distribution in the
system is determined by the balance of the charge separation and charge
relaxation processes [22]. The radiator pipes are the efficient charge dissipating
devices.
There are a number of factors that influence the static electrification
phenomenon:
1) Moisture content: The moisture has a significant effect on the charging
tendency; drying out causes the charge density to increase, while addition of
moisture reduces it. Since transformers are operated with low moisture levels
in oil (below 10 ppm at the time of new oil filling) the highest charging
tendency may be experienced [23].
2) Temperature: There is rise in charging tendency with the temperature since
the dryness of oil increases. Hence, it may be advisable to reduce the flow rate
during the warming-up process.
3) Flow rate: The charging tendency increases with greater flow rates. The
increase varies somewhere between the second and fourth power of the oil
flow velocity. The average flow rate involved in one of the failures was 20 cm/
s over an average typical cross section [24]; the flow rate in windings was 45
to 60 cm/s, and in the pumps and piping in the heat exchangers it was more
than 4.5 m/s. The consideration of static electrification decides the upper limit
of oil flow rate in forced oil cooled transformers, and thus impacts the cooling
system design.
4) Turbulence: The charge motion or generation depends on turbulence in oil.
5) Surface condition: The charge generation/separation process is enhanced
with increase in roughness of solid insulation.
6) Pumps: Pumps can be substantial sources of charge generation [25].
7) Orifices: Orifice effects have been demonstrated to generate charges.
8) Fields: The AC and DC fields have definite impact on static electrification,
which is investigated in [26].
Some of the methods reported for reducing charging tendency are clay filtration of
oil, addition of charge suppressors to oil, etc. [23]. Charge reduction by addition
of charge suppressers is not a viable solution as it increases the electrical

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Cooling Systems

387

conductivity of oil. The oil flow can be reduced in the susceptible temperature
range by operating the cooling system using automatic control.
In addition to incorporating pumps that operate at lower flow velocities, the
effect of changing the location of pumps may also be a consideration if the pumps
prove to be the prime sources of charge generation. Some transformers now have
the pumps mounted at the top of radiators to allow more distance for charge
relaxation in the oil prior to entering the bottom of the transformer.

References
1. Blume, L.F., Boyajian, A., Camilli, G., Lennox, T.C., Minneci, S., and
Montsinger, V.M. Transformer engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York,
and Chapman and Hall, London, 1951.
2. Karsai, K., Kerenyi, D., and Kiss, L. Large power transformers, Elsevier
Publication, Amsterdam, 1987.
3. Norris, E.T. High voltage power transformer insulation, Proceedings IEE, Vol.
110, No. 2, February 1963, pp. 428–440.
4. Higgins, T.J. Formulas for calculating temperature distribution in transformer
cores and other electrical apparatus of rectangular cross section, AIEE
Transactions—Electrical Engineering, Vol. 64, April 1945, pp. 190–194.
5. Rele, A. and Palmer, S. Cooling of large transformer cores, IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-91, No. 4, July/August 1972, pp.
1527–1535.
6. Nakamura, Y., Jia, W., and Yasuhara, M. Incompressible flow through multiple
passages, Numerical Heat Transfer, Pt. A, Vol. 16, 1989, pp. 451–465.
7. Nakadate, M., Toda, K., Sato, K., Biswas, D., Nakagawa, C., and Yanari, T.
Gas cooling performance in disk winding of large-capacity gas-insulated
transformer, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 11, No. 2, April 1996,
pp. 903–908.
8. Kamath, R.V. and Bhat, G. Numerical simulation of oil flow through cooling
ducts of large transformer winding, International Conference on Transformers,
TRAFOTECH-1998, Mumbai, India, 1998, pp. I1–15.
9. Allen, P.H.G. and Allan, D.J. Layer-type transformer-winding cooling factors
derived from analogue solution of the governing equations, Proceedings IEE,
Vol. 110, No. 3, March 1963, pp. 523–534.
10. Preiningerova, S.V. and Pivrnec, M. Temperature distribution in the coil of a
transformer winding, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 124, No. 3, March 1977, pp. 218–
222.
11. Oliver, A.J. Estimation of transformer winding temperatures and coolant flows
using a general network method, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 127, Pt. C, No. 6,
November 1980, pp. 395–405.
12. Pierce, L.W. An investigation of the thermal performance of an oil filled
transformer winding, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 7, No. 3,
July 1992, pp. 1347–1358.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

388

Chapter 9

13. Montsinger, V.M. Loading transformers by temperature, AIEE Transactions,
Vol. 49, 1930, pp. 776–792.
14. Clark, F.M. Factors affecting the mechanical deterioration of cellulose
insulation, AIEE Transactions—Electrical Engineering, Vol. 61, October 1942,
pp. 742–749.
15. Hochart, B. Power transformer handbook, Butterworths and Co. Publishers
Ltd., London, 1987.
16. Shroff, D.H. A review of paper aging in power transformers, Proceedings
IEE, Vol. 132, Pt. C, No. 6, November 1985, pp. 312–319.
17. Morais, R. M, Mannheimer, W.A., Carballeira, M., and Noualhaguet, J. C.
Furfural analysis for assessing degradation of thermally upgraded papers in
transformer insulation, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical
Insulation, Vol. 6, No. 2, April 1999, pp. 159–163.
18. Emanuel, A.E. and Wang, X. Estimation of loss of life of power transformers
supplying nonlinear loads, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. PAS-104, No. 3, March 1985, pp. 628–636.
19. McNutt, W.J., McIver, J.C., Leibinger, G.E., Fallon, D.J., and Wickersheim,
K.A. Direct measurement of transformer winding hot spot temperature, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-103, No. 6, June
1984, pp. 1155–1162.
20. Higaki, M., Kako, Y., Moriyama, M., Hirano, M., Hiraishi, K., and Kurita, K.
Static electrification and partial discharges caused by oil flow in forced oil
cooled core type transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. PAS-98, No. 4, July/August 1979, pp. 1259–1267.
21. Shimizu, S., Murata, H., and Honda, M. Electrostatics in power transformers,
IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-98, No. 4,
July/August 1979, pp. 1244–1250.
22. Tamura, R., Miura, Y., Watanabe, T., Ishii, T., Yamada, N., and Nitta, T. Static
electrification by forced oil flow in large power transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-99, No. 1, January/
February 1980, pp. 335–343.
23. Oommen, T.V. Static electrification properties of transformer oil, IEEE
Transactions on Electrical Insulation, Vol. 23, No. 1, 1988, pp. 123–128.
24. Crofts, D.W. The static electrification phenomena in power transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Electrical Insulation, Vol. 23, No. 1, 1988, pp. 137–146.
25. Howells, E., Zahn, M., and Lindgren, S.R. Static electrification effects in
transformer oil circulating pumps, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol.
5, No. 2, April 1990, pp. 1000–1006.
26. Miyao, H., Higaki, M., and Kamata, Y. Influence of AC and DC fields on
streaming electrification of transformer oil, IEEE Transactions on Electrical
Insulation, Vol. 23, No. 1, 1988, pp. 129–135.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

10
Structural Design

10.1 Importance of Structural Design
The tank of a transformer is a closed structure which is made by steel plates. It
behaves like a plate structure. Stiffeners are usually provided on all the sides and
also on the top cover of the tank to reduce stresses and deflections in plates under
various types of loads. The transformer tanks are designed for a pressure higher
than the operating one, as specified by the standards. The tank design and
fabrication are complicated due to limitations imposed by transportation (weight
and size), requirement that the oil quantity should be optimum, etc. Apart from
pressure and vacuum loads, the transformer structure has to withstand other loads
such as lifting, jacking, haulage, etc. Depending on the location of transformer
installation, the strength of the transformer structure against a seismic load may
also need to be ascertained.
Design of the transformer tank becomes complicated due to number of
accessories and fittings connected or mounted on it. These include: conservator
and radiator mounting arrangements, cooler pipes, turrets which house bushings,
support arrangement for control box housing controls for fans and pumps, support
structures for tap changer drive mechanism, valves for sampling/draining/
filtration, cable trays or conduits for auxiliary wiring, inspection covers for getting
access to important parts inside the transformer such as bushings (for making
connections) and tap changer, cable box, bus duct termination, etc. Certain
simplifying assumptions are done while analyzing the strength of the tank with all
these fittings under various loading conditions.
The stress analysis of a transformer structure can be done by mainly two
methods, viz. analytical methods and numerical methods. The analytical methods
are used for determining the stiffening requirements to limit stresses and
389
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

390

Chapter 10

deflections for simple tank constructions. The tank shapes are usually complex
and the application of analytical methods is difficult. For example, if the tank is
not rectangular and if there are many pockets (extruding structures) or openings,
numerical methods such as FEM are used to determine the stresses and deflections
under various loading conditions.

10.2 Different Types of Loads and Tests
10.2.1 Loads
The transformer tank should be capable of withstanding the following loads:
Lifting and jacking: The tank is designed to facilitate handling of the transformer.
For this purpose, lifting lugs and jacking pads (as shown in figure 10.1 (a)) are
provided on the tank. Lifting lugs, provided towards the top of the tank, are used to
lift the structure by a crane. Jacking pads provided towards the base of the tank,
are used for handling the transformer in the absence of crane, especially at the site.
Generally, four jacking pads/lifting lugs are used.

Figure 10.1 Jacking pad and lifting bollard

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

391

Lifting lugs are used for distribution transformers, where the loads are less.
Lifting bollards are used for medium and large power transformers as shown in
figure 10.1 (b). Ride-over (transport) lugs are provided for the purpose of
supporting the transformer on a floorless wagon during transport.
Haulage load: For local movements of the transformer at the place of installation,
rollers and haulage lugs are provided. The haulage lugs are provided on the lower
portion of the tank, whereas the rollers are provided under the base plate. Usually,
four rollers are provided but for large transformers six or eight rollers may be
provided. In place of rollers, a solid under-base is sometimes provided to facilitate
skidding over rails or pipes.
Seismic and wind load: The transformer has to be designed for a specified seismic
acceleration and wind load. Seismic and wind loads are very important design
considerations for bushings, supporting structures of conservator and radiators,
etc. It is very difficult, if not impossible, to conduct the seismic test on a
transformer. Seismic tests on bushings are usually specified and can be done.
Special care has to be taken for bushings because they have high cantilever load.
Transient pressure rise: When an internal fault takes place in an oil filled
transformer, a large volume of decomposed gases may get generated due to
arcing. Under these conditions, the tank structure has to withstand a rapid rise of
pressure if the pressure relief device does not act in such a short time. If the tank is
not designed with adequate factor of safety, it may rupture leading to fire hazard
and serious environmental impact due to outflow of oil. The tank should be
designed in such a way that it should be in an elastic limit under the pressure rise
conditions. The tank should not be too rigid or too flexible, otherwise it may burst.
Special devices such as sudden pressure relays are used which can act quickly
under such transient pressure rise conditions.
10.2.2 Tests
The following tests are conducted to check the strength of the transformer
structure:
Leak test: This test is meant to check whether the welded joints of the tank
structure are leak-proof or not. The test is conducted by pressurizing the tank
using air pressure. A soap solution is sprayed over all the welded joints under
specified pressure conditions. Any leak due to weld defects (crack, pin hole, etc.)
leads to bubble formation.
Vacuum test: The leak test (done with pressurized air) is followed by the vacuum
test. A specified vacuum is applied to the tank for at least an hour. The permanent
deflections measured after removal of the vacuum should be within the limits
(which depend on the size of tank) specified by the users/standards. The tank is
then cleared for shot-blasting and painting processes. This test is important
because oil filling is done under specified vacuum conditions (either at works or

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

392

Chapter 10

site). In addition, the drying and impregnation may be done in the tank itself (e.g.,
in vapour phase drying process). The vacuum may be partial or full depending on
the voltage class and size of the transformer, and the user specifications.
Pressure test: This test is usually done after all the dielectric tests are completed in
the manufacturer’s works. The accessories like bushings are removed and a
pressure of 5 psi higher than the maximum operating pressure is generally applied
to check the pressure withstand capability of the tank. All the welded joints are
checked manually; if any oil leakage is noticed, the oil is drained and the defective
welding is rectified. The gasket leaks, if any, are also rectified.
Dye-penetration test: This test is conducted for load bearing members to detect
weld defects. In this test, the surface to be tested is cleaned thoroughly and a dye
(usually of pink colour) is applied to the weld surface. The dye is left there for
some time, typically 30 minutes, and then it is wiped clean. During this period, if
there are any weld defects in the surface being tested, the dye due to capillary
action penetrates through. After this, another solution known as developer is
sprayed on the surface. This developer brings out the dye that has penetrated
inside and leaves the pink marks on the locations where the weld defects are
present. This test is useful to detect weld integrity of load bearing members like
jacking pads and lifting lugs/bollards.

10.3 Classification of Transformer Tanks
Depending upon the position of joint between upper and lower parts of the tank,
we have two types of tank construction, viz. conventional tank and bell tank.
Conventional tank: This type of construction has a top cover as shown in
figure 10.2 (a). Since the joint is usually above the top yoke level, it facilitates
a proper placement of magnetic shunts on the tank wall for an effective stray
loss control. The disadvantage is that the core and windings are not visible at
site when the cover is removed. Hence, for inspection of core-winding
assembly, a crane with higher capacity is required to remove the core-winding
assembly from the tank.
Bell tank: In this type of tank construction, shown in figure 10.2 (b), the joint
between the two parts is at the bottom yoke level to facilitate the inspection of
core-winding assembly at site after the bell is removed. Thus, it consists of a
shallow bottom tank and a bell shaped top tank. The bell tank construction may
not be convenient for a proper placement of magnetic shunts if the joint is at such
a height from the bottom that it comes in the path of leakage field. This may lead
to a bolt overheating problem (discussed in Chapter 5).
For the above two types of tank, either plain or shaped tank can be used.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

393

Figure 10.2 Types of tank

Plain tank: The plain tank of rectangular shape is quite simple in construction. It
is easy from design and manufacturing points of view since it facilitates
standardization. The design of stiffeners is also quite simple. It usually leads to
higher oil and steel quantity in high voltage transformers. If special detachable
(bolted) bushing pockets are used for center-line lead HV winding arrangement,
some saving in oil quantity can be achieved. This is usually done in large high
voltage transformers.
Shaped tank. In order to save oil quantity, tank is shaped so that its volume
reduces. The tank shaping is mainly influenced by electrical clearances (between
the high voltage leads and grounded tank), transport considerations, tap changer
mounting arrangements, etc. The lower portion of the tank may be truncated in
order to facilitate the loading of a large transformer on some specific type of
wagon (in case of rail transport) and/or to reduce the oil quantity. The tank walls
may be curved/stepped to reduce the tank size and volume. The shaped tank has
the advantage that the curved portions of its walls give a stiffening effect. But the
design of the shaped tank is more complex leading to higher engineering and
manufacturing time. Also, it may not be conducive for putting magnetic shunts or
eddy current shields on it for an effective stray loss control.
The joint between the two parts of the tank can be either bolted or welded type,
which gives the following two types of construction.
Bolted constructiom The joint between top and bottom tanks can be of bolted
type. The bolted construction, though preferred for easy serviceability, has the
disadvantage of developing leaks if gaskets deteriorate over a period of time. The
oil leakage problem can occur if there is unevenness in the plates which are bolted
or if the gaskets are over-compressed. The bolted joint may lead to overheating
hazard in large transformers.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

394

Chapter 10

Welded construction: This type of construction eliminates the possible leakage
points since the two parts of the tank are welded together. It can thus ensure leakproof joints throughout the life of the transformer. But if a problem or fault
develops inside the transformer, de-welding operation has to be done and there is
a limit on the number of times the de-welding and subsequent welding operations
that can be done. The C-shaped clamps are used during the welding operation and
a thin gasket is provided between the two curbs so that the welding spatters do not
enter inside the tank. Some arrangement is provided inside the tank at the top for
arresting the buckling of cover under the lifting loads.
Depending on whether the tank is totally sealed from the outside atmosphere or is
in contact with the atmosphere, the following two types of construction exist.
Breathing tank construction: Ambient temperature and load variations result in
change of oil volume. The conservator fitted on the tank top allows these volume
changes. The conservator is partially filled with oil and the space in the
conservator communicates with the atmosphere through a breather containing a
moisture absorbing material. In order to eliminate the contact of oil with the
atmosphere (to avoid moisture absorption by it), constant oil pressure system is
used in which a flexible bag (membrane) fitted inside the conservator
communicates with the outside air. The air bag contracts or expands depending on
changes in the oil volume. This construction is commonly used for large power
transformers.
Sealed tank construction In this type of arrangement, free space (filled usually
with nitrogen gas) is provided in the tank for oil expansion based on the maximum
expected oil temperature. The contact of oil with the outside atmosphere gets
totally eliminated. The tank is designed to withstand the pressure variations due to
changes in the oil volume. The construction has the disadvantage that with a
sudden fall in temperature, gases may get released from the oil seriously affecting
the dielectric strength of the insulation system. Higher clearances have to be
provided between electrodes separated by the combined oil and gas spaces (as
compared to the conventional clearances for the oil immersed electrodes).
There are some special types of tank construction based on the application and
features as given below.
Corrugated tank: This construction is used in small distribution transformers to
obviate the need of providing radiators separately. The corrugations are made by
folding a steel sheet continuously on a special purpose machine. These
corrugations are then welded to a steel frame to form a tank wall. The corrugations
provide an adequate cooling surface and also play the roll of stiffeners. In small
distribution transformers, the use of corrugated tanks is common; it can reduce the
manufacturing (fabrication) time substantially.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

395

Cover-mounted construction: In this type of construction, core and windings are
attached to the tank cover. Lifting lugs/bollards are provided on frames. The
construction facilitates connections from the windings to cover mounted
accessories like in-tank type OLTC and small bushings. Access to the lifting lugs/
bollards is provided through the inspection openings on the cover. The complete
core-winding assembly with the top cover can be lifted by means of lifting lugs/
bollards and lowered into the tank. The whole arrangement can be made compact
and simpler. For servicing purpose, the un-tanking of the core-winding assembly
is possible without removing the bushing connections.
Perforated tank: This type of tank is used in dry-type transformers, where the
tank is used just as an enclosure to house the active parts. The perforations allow
the flow of air cooling the inside active parts. The construction generally consists
of detachable panels which cannot take any lifting load. The absence of oil and the
presence of perforations usually lead to higher noise level in dry transformers as
compared to oil cooled transformers, and special measures need to be taken to
reduce the noise level.

10.4 Tank Design
The mechanical design is taken up after the electrical design of a transformer is
finalized. The mechanical design requires following inputs: core dimensions
(diameter, center-to-center distance, etc.), winding details, design insulation
levels at various electrodes (as described in Chapter 8), details of tap changer,
details of accessories (bushings, radiators, fans, pumps, protection devices, etc.),
weight and size limitations during transport and at site, etc. The designer has to
keep in mind the requirements of tank shielding arrangements. The tank
dimensions and profile are decided in a layout drawing drawn to scale considering
electrical clearances, magnetic clearances, transport size limits and
manufacturability. The design of stiffeners is a very important aspect of tank
design. An effective stiffening arrangement can reduce the tank plate thickness.
The stiffeners are designed in such a way that the tank weight is minimum, and at
the same time it should be able to withstand the specified loads. The stiffeners
used are of following types (shown in figure 10.3):
Flat stiffeners: These are used in small rating transformers. These stiffeners,
which have low section modulus, are suitable for small tanks. They are more
compact as compared to the other types of stiffeners.
T stiffeners: These stiffeners offer higher section modulus as compared to the flat
stiffeners but lower than the box stiffeners (for the same cross-sectional area).
They occupy more space than the flat stiffeners but less than the box stiffeners.
They are useful in the cover area where less space is available due accessories like
bushings, turrets, etc. because of which the box stiffeners cannot be used. These

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

396

Chapter 10

are also useful for stiffening a dome shaped cover/irregular cover where stiffening
is difficult with the other types of stiffeners.
Box stiffeners: For large power transformers, the flat and T type stiffeners are not
suitable because their number increases. The box stiffeners give much higher
value of section modulus, and hence they are used in large power transformers.
Aesthetically they look better than the other types of stiffeners. The box stiffeners
can also be used for other purposes. A lifting bollard can be embedded into a box
stiffener for the lifting purpose. A jacking arrangement can be achieved if a plate is
provided (with gussets) at the bottom of a box stiffener. It can also be used to
provide an extra gas space in sealed transformers.
Usually, the stiffening is done vertically. Sometimes horizontal stiffeners are also
provided. The stiffeners are designed to distribute the lifting load properly (more
uniformly). The location of stiffeners on the tank may be affected by space
restrictions. The stiffener dimensions and location depend not only on the strength
considerations but also on the various fittings and accessories which have to be
mounted on the tank.

Figure 10.3 Types of stiffeners

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

397

The stiffeners can be designed as simply supported or fixed support structures.
In the simply supported case, the stiffeners are terminated at some distance from
the top or bottom edge of the tank plates, which may result in higher deflection. If
the stiffener ends are anchored to the top curb and bottom plate (in a conventional
tank) then it is termed as the fixed support stiffener, and this arrangement gives
lower deflection. The T stiffeners and flat stiffeners can be terminated on the curb
whereas box stiffeners can not be terminated because of the space requirement for
bolting operations. For practical reasons one has to leave some space between the
termination of a box stiffener and curb. In such cases, the box stiffener can be tied
to the curb by means of a gusset.
Since many accessories are mounted on the top cover, an adequate space may
not be available for its stiffening. In such cases, higher cover plate thickness needs
to be used with the application of flat or T stiffeners wherever possible.
The base plate of a tank is usually much thicker than its vertical plates. It is
designed to carry a total load corresponding to the sum of entire core-winding
assembly weight, oil head and test pressure. The base plate can be stiffened by
cross channels to reduce its thickness. The box stiffeners may also be used
sometimes for stiffening of the base plate.
A number of local small stiffeners are provided under extended projections/
pockets and shaped tank parts.

10.5 Methods of Analysis
The design of transformer tank structure comprises mainly the analysis of the
combined behavior of plates and stiffeners.
10.5.1 Analytical method
In an analytical method, which can be applied to plain rectangular tanks, each side
(plate) of tank is divided into number of plate panels. One side of a rectangular
tank with three vertical stiffeners is shown in figure 10.4. The center line of a
stiffener is taken as the panel boundary. Hence, for the purpose of analysis there
are four panels. These panels are subjected to loads such as pressure, vacuum, etc.
as described earlier.

Figure 10.4 One side of a rectangular tank

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

398

Chapter 10

Figure 10.5 Rectangular simply supported plate under uniform load

The stress analysis of each panel can be done by using theory of plates. The
stress calculation for simply supported and fixed type of rectangular plates is an
integral part of the transformer tank design. Let us first analyze a simply supported
plate.
Consider a rectangular plate of dimensions a×b and thickness t as shown in
figure 10.5. Let the load per unit area be w; hence the total load on the plate is wba.
The load on the plate area on one side of the diagonal is (1/2) wba, which is
denoted by W. This load acts on the centroid of the triangular area DEF. The
centroid is at a distance of (1/3) h from DF.
Experiments on the simply supported rectangular plate show that the plate has
a tendency to curl up at the corners, and the resultant pressure on each edge acts at
its mid-point. The diagonal DF is the most critical section when one side of the
plate is not very much longer than the other side [1]. The moment arm for the two
reactions R1 and R2 is same. From the conditions of symmetry and equilibrium,
their sum is equal to (1/2) wba.
The bending moment about DF is
(10.1)

Substituting the expressions for reactions and load we get
(10.2)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

399

The length of DF is

Therefore, the average bending moment per unit

length of the diagonal is
(10.3)
From the similarity of triangles FGE and FED we have

(10.4)

Substituting the expression of h in equation 10.3 we get

(10.5)
The section modulus (z) of the plate per unit length along the diagonal is equal to
(1/6) t2. Accordingly, the bending stress at the surface of the plate across the
diagonal DF in the simply supported case is

(10.6)
The analysis for a plate with fixed edges is quite involved. The deflection for a
fixed plate is symmetrical and maximum at its centre. The ratio of two adjacent
sides play an important role in deciding the deflection, and the bending moment at
various locations is calculated by using analytical methods [2]. The maximum
bending moment divided by the section modulus gives the maximum bending
stress in the plate. For the panels of a tank side as shown in figure 10.4, three sides
can be approximately considered as fixed and the fourth (top) side can be
considered as simply supported. The analysis for this case is given in [2].
In order to simplify the calculations, it can be assumed that the behavior of the
tank plate is in between the simply supported and fixed edge conditions. The
stresses calculated under these two conditions are multiplied by empirical factors
to calculate the resultant stress (σr),

σr=k1 σss+k2 σ fe

(10.7)

where σss and σfe are stresses for simple supported and fixed edge conditions
respectively. The constants k1 and k2 are empirical factors such that k1+k2=1.0.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

400

Chapter 10

The numerical methods give accurate stress and deflection values without
having to do simplifying assumptions as done in the analytical methods.
10.5.2 Numerical method
The analytical solution is quite acccurate and is a mathematical expression
that gives the value of a desired unknown quantity at any location in a body.
The analytical methods can be used for simplified situations. For problems
involving complex geometries, material properties and boundary conditions,
the designer depends on numerical methods which give sufficiently accurate
solutions.
The finite element method (FEM) is a very effective numerical analysis tool for
the simulation of structural components under various loading conditions. The
FEM analysis can be used for material optimization, reliability enhancement,
failure analysis and corrective action, verification of new designs, etc. Before the
advent of FEM, many approximations had to be made in the analytical methods
for complex tank geometries, and it was almost impossible to predict the exact
performance of the structures under the given loading conditions. It was not
possible for the designer to know the margin or factor of safety for new designs.
Due to this ignorance factor, the designer had to put extra material thereby
increasing the transformer cost. Using FEM analysis, it is possible to detect high
stress zones and take suitable corrective/preventive actions. The FEM analysis can
be used to investigate problems like vibrations, buckling, non-linear behaviour,
etc.
The steps of FEM analysis have been given in Section 3.4 (while discussing
reactance calculation). A given problem domain is divided into a number of
elements, that are straight lines for 1-D domains, triangular or quadrilateral
elements for 2-D domains, and tetrahedral or cubical elements for 3-D domains.
The transformer tanks can be considered as 2-D shells and can be discretized into
2-D shell elements. The required solution function is approximated over an
element by interpolation between the values at its nodes. The interpolating
functions may be linear or higher order polynomials. Let ui and vi be the x and y
components of displacements at the nodes of a triangular element respectively
(i=1, 2, 3). The vector U=(u1 v1 u2 v2 u3 v3)T then represents nodal displacements.
The displacements over the entire element area maybe given as [3]
(10.8)

where Ni(x, y) are the interpolating functions. Using standard symbols [3], the
strain vector ε=(εx εy γxy)T is related to the displacements as

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

401

ε=[B]U

or

(10.9)

The potential energy of the element (e) is dependent on the displacements over
the element area. As per equation 10.8, it becomes a function of the nodal
displacement vector U. In the absence of internal (body) forces, initial strains and
initial stresses, it is given by
(10.10)
where D is an elasticity matrix containing the appropriate material properties, F is
the nodal load vector, and V is the element volume. Minimizing the above
expression gives the governing equation which determines the solution, i.e.,
∂E/∂U=[K](e)U-F=0
where

(10.11)
This forms the element equation.

All such element equations are combined by first replacing the element-wise
nodal quantities by the corresponding global nodal quantities, and adding all the
element equations. This forms the global system of linear equations,
(10.12)
where U and F are the global displacement and load vectors, and K is the global
stiffness matrix. The above linear system of equations is a large and sparse system
of equations, solved normally by the iterative methods especially suited for
solving such systems. The solutions can be refined for obtaining more accurate
solutions by either using a finer mesh with smaller elements or using higher order
interpolating functions over the elements or both.

10.6 Overpressure Phenomenon in Transformers
The problem of explosions of oil insulated equipment as a result of lowimpedance internal faults has been a major concern. When an internal fault takes
place inside an oil filled transformer, arcing produces a large amount of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

402

Chapter 10

decomposed gas increasing the tank pressure rapidly. The pressure relief device
may not be able to keep up with the gas generation rate and the tank can rupture
[4]. The severity of an internal fault depends mainly on the arc energy and the tank
expansion coefficient. The higher the arc energy and the lower the tank expansion
coefficient, the higher the severity is. The arc voltage is not related very much to
the arc current and is mainly a function of arc length, electrode shape, pressure,
etc. [5,6]. Since the oil is relatively incompressible and since the bottom plate and
side plates of the tank act together as a rigid structure, the tank cover is usually
subjected to the overpressures [7]. In order to reduce such consequences, it is
necessary to determine the resulting overpressures for different faults and
geometrical parameters of the transformer.
Use of flange reinforcing measures such as C-shaped clamps and joint
reinforcement beams [5] is made to increase the strength of tank structures against
excessive overpressures. In a 3-phase split type transformer the major part of the
tank is divided into three parts (one part per phase), with a common ducting for
connections, to take care of transport limits. The pressure rise in such a
configuration may reach an excessive level due to a small expansion coefficient
and the effect of kinetic energy of the oil. Use of a diaphragm type conservator as
a pressure reducing space is suggested as a countermeasure.
The phenomenon has been studied both analytically and experimentally.
Different formulations are proposed for predicting the overpressures during a low
impedance fault. In [8], the results of analysis and experimental work are
combined to get a semi-empirical equation for the peak pressure in the air space of
a pole-type distribution transformer. It is reported that the arc length and (i2t)arc are
the most significant variables, former being generally beyond control. However,
this semi-empirical equation is probably only valid for geometrically similar
transformers and hence may not be generalized. A comprehensive explanation of
the different failure modes of distribution transformers is given in [9], The
overpressure phenomenon is studied using high speed photography and it is
shown experimentally that the arc depth under oil plays an important role in the oil
motion, compression of the air space and the resulting overpressure. It is also
reported that the maximum pressure exerted against the transformer tank cover
depends on two principal parameters: one is the arc energy expended per unit
volume of the air space, and another is the efficiency of the process by which the
arc energy is converted into the kinetic energy.
The equations for the static pressure within the faulted oil filled distribution
transformer as a result of arcing and gas generation are given in [4]. The equations
are derived under known conditions such as tank dimensions, air space, specific
fuses and specific pressure relief devices, and unknown quantities such as fault
current, arc length, arc location and gas temperatures. The finite difference
approach is proposed in [10] to study the phenomenon of arcing in oil insulated
equipment. The solution of proposed method is compared with that of an
analytical formulation for infinite cylinder filled with oil. The application of the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

403

finite difference method for analysis of low-impedance faults in a cylindrical
pole-type distribution transformer is given in [11].

10.7 Seismic Analysis
Earth quake is a dynamic phenomenon which occurs due to release of energy
below the ground because of instability of the earth’s internal structure. The
source of earthquake is a sudden displacement of ground on both sides of a fault
which results from a rupture of a crystal rock. The size of earthquake is measured
by the amount of strain energy released at the source. The earthquake produces
random ground motions which are characterized by simultaneous but statistically
independent horizontal and vertical components. A moderate earthquake may
persist for 15 sec to 30 sec and a severe one for 60 sec to 120 sec. The vibration of
ground motion may be magnified many fold in the equipment. The magnification
depends on the characteristic frequency of vibration of the system consisting of
soil, foundation and equipment.
Transformers are important elements of power supply systems. It is very
essential that utmost care is taken while designing their tank and accessories for
seismic withstand. If they are not adequately designed, it could result into
anchorage failure, bushing failure, conservator bracket deformation, oil leakage
and other miscellaneous damages. Certain accessories and protection devices
(e.g., buchholz relay) may malfunction during an earthquake giving a false
indication of fault in the transformer. The main principle for improving strength
under earthquake conditions is that the natural frequency of the transformer and
its parts should be above 30 Hz ensuring a lower acceleration factor.
Design for seismic conditions is based on the seismic zone where the
equipment would be installed. The transformer user should provide information to
the transformer manufacturer about the seismic activity in terms of maximum
accelerations, response spectra or time histories. The seismic zone of a place
defines the intensity of an earthquake which is likely to hit that place. As per IEEE
C57.114–1990 (IEEE seismic guide for power transformers and reactors), typical
values of maximum ground acceleration range from 0.1 g (zone 1) to 0.5 g (zone
4), where g is the acceleration due to gravity. If the transformer is not ground
mounted, the acceleration at the mounting location has to be considered.
Although seismic withstand can be most accurately checked by a laboratory
test on an equipment, it is very difficult to conduct the test on a product like
transformer. Hence, the following three calculation methods are commonly used
for checking the seismic withstand of transformers.
Seismic coefficient method: This is an approximate method in which normal
static stress calculations are done with certain seismic accelerations applied to the
center of gravity of structures. Seismic coefficients are applied separately to
various vulnerable components such as bushings, conservators, radiators, etc.,

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

404

Chapter 10

which are mostly the overhanging or extended portions of the transformer
structure. This method does not take into consideration the natural frequencies of
the structure or its components.
Response spectrum method: As per IEEE C57.114–1990, when the natural
frequencies of a transformer are lower than about 30 Hz, the static method should
not be used and one has to take into account the natural frequencies of the
structure. The response spectrum method determines the dynamic response which
depends on the natural frequencies of the structure. The transformer needs to be
analyzed as a spring-mass model using response spectrum curve with an
appropriate damping factor. The response of the structure to an earthquake due to
each mode of vibration is calculated, and the total response is determined by
combining the individual modal responses (square root of sum of squares
technique). A numerical method like FEM needs to be used for this purpose. The
FEM analysis gives stresses, accelerations and displacement plots which help in
identifying weak structures that need to be strengthened.
Time history method: This method is computationally very intensive and requires
actual earthquake data. This method can be used for analysis of structures which
underwent an earthquake whose time history is known.
Since it is not possible to test the seismic withstand of transformers by an actual
test, experimental investigations have been done to evaluate their natural
frequencies and mode shapes of vibrations. The results of multi-point random
excitation test and forced vibration test are compared with that of FEM analysis in
[12]. A significant global deformation mode is reported at a frequency of about 3.5
Hz. The results of experimental tests on a buchholz relay are compared with that
of the numerical analysis. In another reference [13], the efficacy of amplification
factor and response factor of a bushing given in IEC standard (IEC 61463, Ed. 1.1,
Bushings—Seismic qualification) is examined.
The design precautions suggested by IEEE C57.114–1990 are: placing of
transformer and interconnected accessories/equipment on a strong and common
foundation to reduce a differential movement during an earthquake, firm
anchoring of the transformer by welding its base to the structural steel members
embedded in or firmly fixed to the concrete foundation, etc.

10.8 Transformer Noise: Characteristics and Reduction
With the growing consciousness on the ill effects of noise pollution, many users
are specifying lower noise levels for transformers. While the trend of ever
increasing transformer ratings implies a corresponding rise in noise level, noisereducing measures have to be adopted to make the transformer quieter. By using
modern design methods and materials, noise emissions from the transformer can
be economically lowered to the acceptable levels. In order to reduce noise level, it
is very important to know and understand the sources of noise. The noise pressure

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

405

generated by vibration of core and windings is transmitted to tank surfaces though
the oil medium. Since the oil is relatively incompressible, the noise is transmitted
without appreciable damping. The tank responds to these noise waves depending
on its natural frequencies and mode shapes of vibrations.
The principal source of transformer noise, the magnetic core, has been
elaborated in Chapter 2. In this chapter the other two sources of noise, viz. loadcontrolled noise and equipment noise are discussed.
10.8.1 Load-controlled noise
This noise is emitted by a loaded transformer in addition to its no-load noise. It is
caused by electromagnetic forces between the windings resulting from the
leakage fields and is proportional to the square of the load current. These forces
cause the winding vibrations and acoustic radiations having frequency of 100 or
120 Hz (twice the power frequency). It is mainly the axial vibrations of the
winding which contribute to the noise (the radial vibrations can be significant only
for winding diameters greater than 6 meters [14]). The contribution of loadcontrolled noise to the overall noise level of the transformer becomes significant
when the operating flux density in the core is lower than 1.4 T. At such a low value
of flux density, noise from the core is considerably reduced. The other sources of
load-controlled noise are the vibrations of tank walls and the magnetic shunts
placed on them. If the magnetic shunts are rigidly anchored to the tank wall, the
noise due to their vibrations is usually low.
The vibration amplitudes produced by a given axial compressive force
(corresponding to a load current flowing in a winding) depend on the winding
properties, viz. mass, modulus of elasticity and damping. Pressboard and other
insulating materials play an important role in deciding the winding response. The
winding noise can be kept as low as possible by using a pressboard material with
a high damping coefficient and applying a proper value of pre-stress to the
winding. The winding natural frequencies should be quite away from the
frequencies of the exciting eompressive forces (twice the power frequency and its
multiples), since a resonance will amplify the vibrations and noise.
The loaded transformer represents a typical magneto-mechanical system
immersed in a fluid (oil). For developing the numerical method for accurate
calculation of the load-controlled noise, the electromagnetic field, mechanical
displacement field, acoustic pressure field and their couplings have to be
considered as one system. Due to the complexity of this multi-field problem, a
combination of the finite element and boundary element methods is used in [15]
for the prediction of the load-controlled noise of power transformers.
10.8.2 Noise due to cooling equipment
Fan noise is a result of vortex flows in the vicinity of its blades. The noise is a
function of air delivery, blade size and speed. While the noise due to core produces
frequencies in the range of 100 to 600 Hz, the frequencies associated with the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

406

Chapter 10

noise due to cooling equipment (fans and pumps) are usually below and above
this frequency range in the sound spectrum. In general, high flow speed of cooling
medium of fans and pumps should be avoided.
Since the fan noise is a function of its speed and circumferential velocity, a low
speed fan has a smaller noise level. As the speed is lowered, air delivery also
reduces necessitating an increase in number of fans. Many times, the noise level
specified is so low that it may not be possible to get such a low noise fan.
Therefore, ONAN (OA) cooling should be specified/used in place of mixed
ONAN/ONAF (FA) cooling for small and medium rating power transformers,
even if it results in increase of number of radiators.
A radiator noise is caused by the tank vibration transmitted through cooler
pipes connecting the tank and radiator (structure borne vibration). Pipe-work and
supporting structures should be designed such that there is no resonance.
10.8.3 Noise level reduction
It is pointed out in Chapter 2 that a reduction in noise level is not significant if the
operating peak flux density in the core is reduced. A lower value of the operating
flux density also results in higher material cost and size of the transformer. Hence,
other cost-effective noise reduction methods are commonly used which are now
described.
There are different ways by which the noise can be reduced. Methods like
stiffening the bracing or supporting parts and adding cushions between parts of a
transformer have long been known and used [16] for reducing vibrations and
noise. Barrier walls and total sound-proof enclosures have also been commonly
used [17]. An easy but expensive way would be to put the transformer in a closed
room whose walls and floor are massive. The noise reduces as it tries to pass
through a massive wall. The noise can also be reduced by building a free-standing
enclosure of concrete and steel plates around the transformer. However, this
method has some disadvantages (e.g., a large area is needed for the transformer
installation). Use of sound insulation panels is another way of getting reduced
noise levels without any additional space requirement. The closely fitting sound
insulation panels described in [18] are mounted between reinforcing channels
(stiffeners). The assembly consists of a resilient steel sheet, a steel plate and
weights. The steel sheet connects the steel plate to the stiffeners. The weights are
placed at the boundaries of the plate and sheet to avoid the transmission of
structure borne vibrations from the stiffeners to the steel plate. The noise level
reduction of 14 dB is reported by the use of these insulation panels. Development
of a vibration controlled sound insulation panel, capable of reducing the noise
generated from a transformer by 12 to 13 dB, is reported in [19]. The panel
consists of highly damped plates which are mounted on the side walls of the
transformer tank with isolation rubber pieces.
A substantial reduction of noise (of the order of 15 dB) can also be obtained by
using a double tank design. The transformer is contained in the inner tank which is

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

407

supported inside the outer tank. Both the tanks are suitably insulated from each
other to reduce the structure borne sound. Glass wool is placed in the space
between the two tanks for the effective noise reduction.
Active noise control is one more technique for the noise level reduction, in
which an anti-phase noise is generated and superimposed on the noise emitted by
the transformer. It requires very sophisticated instrumentation and computational
facilities. The active control scheme implemented with Digital Signal Processing
(DSP) is reported in [20]. It is reported that a noise level reduction of 5 to 15 dB
can be achieved depending upon the effectiveness of implementation of the
technique.
In dry type distribution transformers (resin impregnated or cast resin), due to
the absence of oil and presence of openings/perforations on the tank (for effective
air circulation and cooling), the noise level can be higher. Hence, the core limbs
can be of bolted construction in addition to the bolted yokes to give more rigidity
to the core structure and reduce the noise emanating from it.
The noise reduction techniques can be summarized as below.
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

Reduction in core flux density: This gives noise reduction of 3 to 5 dB for a
reduction in flux density by 10% (or approximately 2 dB per flux density
reduction of 0.1 T). The method has adverse effects on the cost and size of
transformers.
Hi-B grade and scribed core materials give 2 to 3 dB reduction as compared to
non Hi-B grades.
Avoidance of core resonance by calculation of core resonant frequencies: The
core natural frequencies should not coincide with the excitation frequencies
as discussed in Chapter 2.
Increased core damping: By application of suitable viscoelastic or adhesive
coating to the core laminations, the noise level can be reduced.
It should be ensured that any links or attachments to the core are flexible so
that they do not transmit the vibrations.
Use of step-lap joint: It gives reduction by about 4 to 5 dB as compared to the
mitred construction for the commonly used flux densities (1.6 to 1.7 T).
The corner protrusions of the built core should be cut since they may
contribute to noise due to vibrations (also they are not useful as they do not
generally carry any flux).
The clamping pressure on the core should be adequately distributed so that no
appreciable length of the core is left unclamped. If limbs/yokes are clamped
with resin-glass or fiber-glass tapes, the pitch (distance between two tapes)
should be small so that an adequate uniform pressure is applied.
To reduce the structure borne vibrations, the core-winding assembly should
be isolated from the tank base by use of oil compatible anti-vibration pads
between them. Use of anti-vibration pads is also made between frames and
tank. Such isolations can give a noise level reduction of 2 to 4 dB.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

408

Chapter 10

10. Use of sound insulation panels between tank stiffeners can give 5 to 15 dB
reduction.
11. An increased tank wall mass, by use of sand in hollow braces on the wall, can
give appreciable noise level reduction.
12. Use of double tank design: Inner and outer tanks are suitably insulated from
each other to eliminate structure borne vibrations. Also, suitable sound
absorbent wool is placed between the two tanks. The noise reduction is about
15 dB.
13. Complete concrete or brick wall enclosures: The noise reduction is about 20
to 30 dB, but the method is quite expensive.
14. Use of active phase cancellation technique: The sound emitted by a
transformer is overlaid by externally applied anti-phase sound. A noise level
reduction of 5 to 15 dB may be possible.
15. If the transformer noise level required is too low to get a fan with a lower
noise level, ONAN (OA) cooling may be specified/used in place of mixed
ONAN/ONAF (FA) cooling for small and medium rating transformers.
Some precautions which need to be taken at the site for noise level control are:
16. The reflecting surfaces should not coincide with half the wavelength of
frequencies of noise emitted by the transformer [21] (to avoid standing waves
and reverberations/echoes).
17. Fire walls are sometimes placed adjacent to the transformer. It may not be
possible to place them at a location so that no undesirable reflections occur. In
such cases a sound-absorbent material, suitable for outdoor use, may have to
be applied on the walls.
18. Dry type distribution transformers are mostly located in a room inside a
building. With the walls of the room having a low sound absorption
coefficient, the sound emitted by the transformer reflects back and forth
between the walls. This may lead to a considerable increase of noise level.
These aspects should be duly considered by the users (while designing the
room) and manufacturers (while designing the transformer).
19. If simple barrier walls are used for obstructing the noise, they are not effective
at the edges. The walls have to be extended at right angles on one or both ends
with an application of sound-absorbent material for better results.
20. The transformer should not be mounted on a foundation on which adjacent
walls are also mounted because the vibrations from the transformer may get
transmitted through the foundation to the walls. The vibration of these walls
will increase the overall noise level.
21. A solid connection between a vibrating transformer and any solid structure in
the vicinity should be avoided (flexible connections can be used as far as
possible).
22. The tank base can be isolated from the supporting ground/foundation by a
suitable vibration-damper to reduce structure borne vibrations.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Structural Design

409

10.8.4 Noise level measurement
A noise level is commonly measured in decibels (dB) by comparing the pressure
generated by a noise source with some standard level. The noise level is measured
on ‘A’ weighted scale which closely follows the sensitivity of human ear. There are
basically two methods of noise measurement: sound pressure measurement and
sound intensity measurement. The details of test methods and acceptable test
environment conditions are given in IEC standard 60076–10 (Determination of
sound levels, First Edition, 2001). Sound pressure level is a scalar quantity and
requires simple instrumentation.
Sound intensity is a vector quantity and the method measures directional
sound. It is therefore less affected by a background noise. Hence, the sound
intensity method can give more accurate measurements in the presence of
background noise. However, sound intensity measurements require higher skill
and more sophisticated instrumentation. Information about the location and
characteristics of noise sources can be obtained by studying the frequency
spectrum.
Apart from design challenges, the measurement of low noise poses a difficult
problem. The minimum level of noise which can be measured is limited by the
ambient noise conditions in the test area. Special enclosures may have to be used
to shield the instruments (test set-up) and transformer from the high ambient
noise.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Seely, F.B. and Smith, J.O. Advanced mechanics of materials, John Wiley and
Sons, New York, London, 1952.
Timoshenko, S. and Woinowsky-Krieger, S. Theory of plates and shells,
McGraw-Hill Inc., Singapore, 1959.
Zienkiewicz, O.C. Finite element method, McGraw Hill, London, 1977.
Goodman, E.A. and Zupon, L. Static pressures developed in distribution
transformers due to internal arcing under oil, IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-95, No. 5, September/October 1976, pp.
1689–1698.
Kawamura, T., Ueda, M., Ando, K., Maeda, T., Abiru, Y., Watanabe, M., and
Moritsu, K., Prevention of tank rupture due to internal fault of oil-filled
transformer, CIGRE 1988, Paper No. 12–02.
Tagaki, T., Ishii, T., Okada, T., Kurita, K., Tamura, R., and Murata, H. Reliability
improvement of 500 kV large capacity power transformer, CIGRE 1978, Paper
No. 12–02.
Hamel, A., Dastous, J.B., and Foata, M. Estimating overpressures in poletype distribution transformers—Part I: Tank withstand evaluation, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 13–119.
Mahieu, W.R. Prevention of high-fault rupture of pole-type distribution

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

410

Chapter 10

transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS94, No. 5, September/October 1975, pp. 1698–1707.
9. Barkan, P., Damsky, B.L., Ettlinger, L.F., and Kotski, E.J. Overpressure
phenomena in distribution transformers with low impedance faults: experiment
and theory, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS95, No. 1, January/February 1976, pp. 37–47.
10. Foata, M., Iordanescu, M., and Hardy, C. Computational methods for the
analysis of explosions in oil-insulated equipment, IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, Vol. 3, No. 1, February 1988, pp. 286–293.
11. Dastous, J.B., Foata, M., and Hamel, A. Estimating overpressures in poletype distribution transformers—Part II: Prediction tools, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 120–127.
12. Bellorini, S., Bettinali, F., Salvetti, M., Gatti, F., Zafferani, G., and Monzani,
O. Mechnical Seismic behavior of power transformers, CIGRE 1998, Paper
No. 12–212.
13. Bellorini, S., Bettinali, F., Salvetti, M., and Zafferani, G. Seismic qualification
of transformer high voltage bushings, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
Vol. 13, No. 4, October 1998, pp. 1208–1213.
14. Reiplinger, E. Study of noise emitted by power transformers based on today’s
viewpoint, CIGRE 1988, Paper No. 12–08.
15. Rausch, M., Kaltenbacher, M., Landes, H., Lerch, R., Anger, J., Gerth, J., and
Boss, P. Combination of finite and boundary element methods in investigation
and prediction of load-controlled noise of power transformers, Journal of Sound
and Vibration, 250 (2), 2002, pp. 323–338.
16. George, R.B. Power transformer noise: Its characteristics and reduction, AIEE
Transactions, March 1931, pp. 347–353.
17. Murray, C.S. Transformer audio noise problems on an electric power system,
AIEE Transactions, Vol. 68, 1949, pp. 740–752.
18. Kanoi, M., Hori, Y., Maejima, M., and Obta, T. Transformer noise reduction
with new sound insulation panel, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-102, No. 9, September 1983, pp. 2817–2825.
19. Ebisawa, Y., Hirai, K., Suda, K, and Ikeda, M. Development of new type sound
insulation panel for transformers, International Conference on Transformers,
Transformer-97, Kolobrzeg, May 1997, pp. 37–42.
20. Teoh, C., Soh, K., Zhou, R., Tien, D., and Chan, V. Active noise control of
transformer noise, International Conference on Energy Management and
Power Delivery, EMPD ‘98. Vol. 2, March 1998, pp. 747 -753.
21. http://www.federalpacific.com/: Understanding transformer noise.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

11
Special Transformers

11.1 Rectifier Transformers
Duties of rectifier transformers serving special industrial loads are more stringent
than conventional transformers. Electrical energy in the form of direct current is
required in electrolytic processes used in aluminum smelters and chemical plants
(production of chlorine, soda, etc.). Various methods used for converting AC into
DC in earlier days included use of motor-generator set, rotary converters and
mercury arc rectifiers. With the rapid development in power electronic converters
and switching devices, transformers with modern static converters (rectifiers) are
being widely used for current ratings as high as hundreds of kilo-amperes. Design
and manufacture of transformers with the rectifier duty poses certain challenges.
Complex winding arrangements, high currents and associated stray field effects,
additional losses and heating effects due to harmonics, necessity of maintaining
constant direct current, etc. are some of the special characteristics of rectifier
transformers.
11.1.1 Bridge connection
One of the most popular rectifier circuits is three-phase six-pulse bridge circuit as
shown in figure 11.1. It gives a 6-pulse rectifier operation with the r.m.s. value of
the secondary current for ideal commutation (zero overlap angle) as

(11.1)
where Id is the direct current. For a transformer with unity turns ratio, the r.m.s.
value of the primary current is also given by the above expression.
411
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

412

Chapter 11

Figure 11.1 Bridge connection

The average value of direct voltage is

(11.2)
where E is line-to-line r.m.s. voltage.
The secondary winding does not carry any direct current (the average value
over one cycle is zero). The ratings of both primary and secondary windings are
equal, which can be obtained by using equations 11.1 and 11.2 as
(11.3)
Thus, in the bridge connection the capacity of a transformer is well utilized
because the required rating of (1.047 Pd) is the minimum value for a 6-pulse
operation. The bridge connection is simple and quite widely used.
11.1.2 Interphase transformer connection
When the current rating increases, two or more rectifier systems may need to be
paralleled. The paralleling is done with the help of an interphase transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

413

which absorbs at any instant the difference between the direct voltages of the
individual systems so that there are no circulating currents. Two 3-pulse rectifier
systems (operating with a phase displacement of 60°) paralleled through an
interphase transformer are shown in figure 11.2.

Figure 11.2 Arrangement with interphase transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

414

Chapter 11

The difference between the (instantaneous values of) direct voltages of two
systems is balanced by the voltage induced in the windings of the interphase
transformer, for which they are in series connection. Since both the windings are
linked with the same magnitude of magnetic flux, the voltage difference is
equally divided between them. The output DC voltage at any instant is the
average value of DC voltages of the two systems. Thus, the paralleling of two 3pulse systems results in a system with 6-pulse performance.
The r.m.s. value of the secondary current is given by

(11.4)
where Id is the total direct current (sum of the direct currents of two rectifier
systems). Each secondary conducts for one-third of cycle, and it can be proved
that the rating of two secondary windings considered together is 1.48 Pd . Since
the primary winding carries the current pulses in both half cycles, it is utilized
efficiently (compared to secondary windings). The r.m.s. value of its current is

(11.5)
The corresponding primary rating is 1.047 Pd, the minimum value which can be
obtained for a 6-pulse performance.
Since the flux in the magnetic circuit of the interphase transformer is
alternating with 3 times the supply frequency when two 3-pulse systems are
paralleled or with 6 times the supply frequency when two 6-pulse systems are
paralleled, the core losses are higher. Hence, the operating flux density in the
interphase transformer is designed to be around 50 to 67% of the value used for the
conventional transformer [1],
If a 12-pulse operation is desired, two 6-pulse rectifier systems operating with
a phase displacement of 30° are combined through an interphase transformer. In
this case, the time integral of the voltage to be absorbed is smaller as compared to
the 6-pulse operation (due to smaller voltage fluctuation in the ripple). Also, the
frequency of the voltage is 6 times the supply frequency. Hence, the size and cost
of the interphase transformer is reduced. When the 12-pulse operation is obtained
through one primary winding (usually star connected) and two secondary
windings (one in star and other in delta connection), it may be difficult to get the
ratio of turns of two secondary windings equal to
(because of low number of
turns). In such a case, the 30° phase displacement is obtained by having two
primary windings, one connected in star and other in delta, and two secondary
windings both connected either in star or delta. One such arrangement is shown in
figure 11.3.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

415

Figure 11.3 Twelve-pulse operation

Since the two primary windings are displaced by 30°, it is necessary to have an
intermediate yoke [2] to absorb the difference between the two limb fluxes
(see figure 11.4). The intermediate yoke area should be corresponding to
the difference of the two fluxes (which is about 52% of the main limb area).
Under the balanced condition of the two paralleled rectifier systems, the
currents (average values) in both the windings of the interphase transformer are
equal. This results in equal flux in the same direction in both the limbs forcing the
flux to return through the high reluctance non-magnetic path outside the core (a
substantial portion of DC ampere-turns is absorbed along the non-magnetic return
path). Other way to explain it is that since net ampere-turns are zero in the window
(currents are directed in opposite directions inside the window), flux lines in the
closed magnetic path are absent. Hence, the flux density in the core is low under
the balanced operation. A slight unbalance in currents of the two systems results in
a non-zero value of ampere-turns acting on the closed magnetic path, which may
drive the core into saturation [3]. Thus, the interphase transformer draws a high
excitation current under the unbalanced conditions. This is one more reason
(apart from higher core losses) for keeping the operating flux density lower in
interphase transformers.

Figure 11.4 Intermediate yoke arrangement

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

416

Chapter 11

Although the interphase transformer connection has some disadvantages, viz.
higher rating of secondary winding and saturation of magnetic circuit due to
unbalance between two paralleled systems, it competes well with the bridge
connection in a certain voltage-current range. The application of the interphase
transformers is not restricted to paralleling of two systems; for example with a
three-limb core, three systems can be paralleled [1],
If the pulse number has to be further increased (e.g., 24-pulse operation), the
required phase shift is obtained by using zigzag connections or phase shifting
transformers [1,2].
11.1.3 Features of rectifier transformers
Rectifier transformers are used in applications where the secondary voltage is
required to be varied over a wide range at a constant current value. It is extremely
difficult and uneconomical to have taps on the secondary winding because of its
very low number of turns and high current value. The taps are either provided on
the primary winding, or a separate regulating transformer (autotransformer) is used
(feeding the primary of the main transformer) which can be accommodated in the
same tank. Various circuit arrangements which can be used to regulate the
secondary voltage are elaborated in [4].
For higher pulse operations, the extended delta connection is shown to be more
advantageous than the zigzag connection, as it results into lower eddy losses and
short circuit forces [5].
The output connections, which carry very high currents, increase the
impedance of the transformer significantly. The increase in impedance due to
these connections can be calculated for a single conductor as per equation 3.80.
For go-and-return conductors of rectangular dimensions, the impedance can be
calculated as per the formulae given in [6].
For large rating rectifier transformers, the field due to high currents causes
excessive stray losses in structural parts made from magnetic steel. Hence, these
parts are usually made of non-magnetic steel.
Rectifier transformers are subjected to harmonics due to non-sinusoidal current
duty. Hence, sometimes the pulse number gets decided by harmonic
considerations. Due to harmonics, more elaborate loss calculations are required
for rectifier transformers as compared to the conventional transformers [7].
Sometimes the core of the rectifier transformer supplying power electronic
loads is designed to have a small gap in the middle of each limb [5] to limit the
residual flux and keep the magnetizing reactance reasonably constant. This
feature also limits the inrush current thereby protecting the power electronic
devices. Under normal operating conditions, the core flux fringing out in the gap
between the two core parts hits the inner winding causing higher eddy losses. In
order to mitigate this effect, the windings may also have to be designed with a gap
at the location facing the core gap.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

417

Because of possibilities of rectifier faults, special design and manufacturing
precautions are taken for rectifier transformers. It is generally preferred to design
the rectifier transformers with larger core area with the corresponding smaller
number of turns to reduce short circuit forces [8]. Disk type windings are preferred
since they have better short circuit strength compared to layer windings. Quality
of drying/impregnation processes and integrity of clamping/support structures
have to be very good. The paper insulation on winding conductors can also be
strengthened.

11.2 Converter Transformers for HVDC
There has been a steady increase in High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC)
transmission schemes in the world because of many advantages of HVDC
transmission as compared to HVAC transmission [9, 10]. The converter transformer
is one of the most important and costly components of HVDC transmission
system. The converter transformer design has much in common with that of the
conventional power transformer except a few special design aspects which are
elaborated in this section.
11.2.1 Configurations
The standard 12-pulse converter configuration can be obtained using star-star and
star-delta connections with one of the following arrangements, viz. 6 single-phase
two-winding, 3 single-phase three-winding and 2 three-phase two-winding. The
arrangements are shown in figure 11.5.

Figure 11.5 Configurations of converter transformers

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

418

Chapter 11

Figure 11.6 Schematic diagram of bipolar 12-pulse operation

The weight and size of individual transformer are highest and overall cost (with
all transformers considered) is lowest in the three-phase two-winding
configuration, whereas the weight and size of individual transformer are lowest
and overall cost is highest in the single-phase two-winding configuration. Since
the cost of spare transformer in the single-phase two-winding configuration is
lowest (that of only one of the six transformers), it is more commonly used.
11.2.2 Insulation design
Simplified schematic diagram for bipolar (double) 12-pulse operation is shown in
figure 11.6. The windings connected to converter and that connected to AC side
are generally termed as valve and AC windings respectively. Since the potentials
of the valve winding connections are determined by the combination of
conducting valves at any particular instant, the entire valve winding has to be
fully insulated. Also, unlike the AC winding, both the terminals of the valve
winding experience the full DC voltage of the bridge to which it is connected.
Hence, the end insulation is higher resulting into greater radial leakage field at the
winding ends. The winding eddy loss due to radial leakage field can be much
higher than the conventional transformer, if the conductor dimensions are not
chosen properly.
Thus, in addition to the normal AC voltage, the valve windings are subjected to
a direct voltage depending on their position with respect to ground. Under an AC
voltage, potential distribution is in inverse proportion to capacitance or electric
stress is inversely proportional to permittivity in a multi-dielectric system. Since
the permittivity of oil is about half of solid insulation, the stress in oil is more
under the AC voltage condition in the conventional transformers. Since the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

419

dielectric strength of the oil is quite less as compared to that of the solid
insulation, the insulation design problem reduces mainly to designing of oil ducts
as elaborated in Chapter 8. Contrary to AC conditions, under DC voltage
conditions the voltage distribution is in direct proportion to resistance or electric
stress is directly proportional to resistivity. At lower temperatures the resistivity of
solid insulating materials used in transformers is quite high as compared to that of
the oil. The ratio of resistivity of a high quality pressboard to that of the oil is
about 100 at 20°C, which reduces to as low as 3.3 at 90°C [11]. This is because the
fall in the resistivity of the pressboard with temperature is much higher than that of
the oil [12]. Such a large variation in the ratio of the two resitivities increases the
complexity of insulation design.
Thus, under DC conditions at lower temperatures, most of the voltage gets
distributed across the solid insulation and stress in it greatly exceeds that in the
oil. The oil ducts have practically only AC voltage across them, whereas solid
insulations (barriers, washers, supporting and clamping components, etc.)
generally have preponderance of DC voltage with a certain amount of
superimposed AC voltage. Therefore, the pressboard barriers tend to be more in the
converter transformers as compared to the conventional transformers. However,
the proportion of solid cannot be higher than a certain value because the
composite oil-solid system has to withstand AC voltage tests as well.
Let the symbols ε and ρ denote relative permittivity and resistivity. With a
voltage V applied across two parallel plates shown in figure 11.7, under AC field
conditions the stresses in oil and solid insulation are
(11.6)

Figure 11.7 Oil-solid insulation system

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

420

Chapter 11

and under DC field conditions the stresses are
(11.7)

For non-uniform field conditions involving complex electrode shapes, the
techniques described in Chapter 8 should be used to calculate the stresses.
Under steady-state DC conditions, space charges get accumulated at the
boundary of the oil and solid insulation. When there is a polarity reversal, in
which the applied DC voltage changes from +V to -V, an equivalent of the voltage
difference 2V gets applied. As the time required for reversing the polarity of the
applied voltage is much shorter than the space charge relaxation time [13], the
voltage due to space charge is not affected during the time of polarity reversal.
Therefore, using equations 11.6 and 11.7 the stresses in the oil and solid
insulation under the polarity reversal condition can be given by
(11.8)

(11.9)

Thus, under the polarity reversal condition, the oil gap is stressed more
It can be easily seen from the above equations
that the smaller the stress across the oil gap before the polarity reversal, the more
the stress is across it after the polarity reversal. The voltage distribution under
various conditions is shown in figure 11.8. The voltage across the oil gap is much
higher during the polarity reversal condition (Case 3) as compared to Case 2 of
steady-state DC voltage condition (prior to the polarity reversal).
For the oil-solid composite insulation system, a relatively low DC voltage
superimposition on AC voltage has very little effect on the partial discharge
inception voltage [12–15]; this is due the fact that most of the DC voltage gets
dropped across the solid insulation, which has a high DC withstand voltage. If,
however, the DC voltage magnitude is within the range of the breakdown DC
voltage, the breakdown behaviour of the entire system is determined by the DC
voltage. Although the converter transformers are stressed by combined AC and
DC voltages during service conditions, it is not considered necessary to test
them with superimposed voltages [16]. Conventional power frequency and
impulse tests are generally sufficient besides pure DC voltage tests and the
polarity reversal test.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

421

Figure 11.8 Voltage distribution under various conditions

Like in the case of AC insulation design (Chapter 8), the stresses under DC can
be calculated accurately by numerical methods. The field distribution is generally
calculated for the worst case situation, say at 20°C, since at this temperature the
ratio of resistivity of the solid insulation to that of the oil is high resulting in high
stress in the solid insulation. The density of equipotential lines in barriers/
cylinders is much higher as compared to the oil, necessitating an increase in their
thickness as compared to the conventional transformers. The shape and placement
of barriers and the width of the resulting oil ducts would have already been
decided by the requirements of AC design and the thermal considerations [11].
Hence, it is obvious that the high strength of the solid insulation cannot be fully
utilized from the DC design consideration if the stress in the oil gap (having a
lower strength) has to be kept low under the AC and polarity reversal conditions
[17]. Discontinuities in solid insulations result into higher tangential (creep)
stresses along the solid-oil interfaces, and hence these should be properly looked
at while finalizing the insulation design.
The insulation design of the converter transformers is complicated by the fact
that the ratio of resitivities of the solid insulation and oil, which varies
considerably as explained earlier, is greatly influenced by a number of factors
[16], viz. temperature, field strength, moisture, time and aging (contrary to the
conventional transformers where the corresponding ratio of permittivities does
not exceed about 2 and is practically independent of external factors).
The volt-time characteristics of the oil under DC voltage application are
reported in [13,18] for plane-plane electrode; the DC breakdown voltage shows a
rapid rate of decrease for stressing time till 100 seconds, after which there is hardly
any decrease. The long-time breakdown voltage (t→∞) is 70 to 80% of the one-

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

422

Chapter 11

minute breakdown voltage [18]. Under combined AC-DC voltage, the AC
breakdown voltage of the oil decreases as the DC voltage increases. The DC 1minute withstand voltage of the oil gap is about 20 to 30% lower than the AC 1minute withstand voltage [14,18,19]; on the contrary the oil-impregnated paper/
solid insulation withstands more DC voltage as compared to AC voltage [14]. The
higher DC strength of the solid insulation can be partly explained by the absence
of partial discharges which lower the strength in the case of AC voltage. Even if
there are oil voids in the solid insulation, the stress in them is too low under DC
voltage to initiate partial discharges.
It is reported in [20] that the dielectric strength of the converter transformer
insulation under the polarity reversal condition is similar to that under switching
impulse stresses. An equivalent AC power frequency voltage test has been
suggested for the polarity reversal test.
From the typical schematic shown in figure 11.6, it is clear that when a number
of converters are connected in series, the line (AC side) windings are connected in
parallel across the same lines and the inductively transferred overvoltage to
ground increases cumulatively from one converter bridge to the next higher
bridge because the valve (DC side) windings are connected in series (although
voltages across the valve windings remain almost the same for all the converters).
11.2.3 Other design aspects
On-load tap changer (OLTC): The OLTC of a converter transformer plays a
crucial role in HVDC transmission system. The OLTC tap position is adjusted to
get a voltage which minimizes the reactive power requirement of HVDC
converters (firing angle of converters is kept as minimum as possible). Hence,
the OLTC is an important constituent of the HVDC control scheme. The number
of OLTC operations in the converter transformer is usually much higher than
that in the conventional power transformer for the same reason. The OLTC is
used for effective control of the power flowing through HVDC line and the DC
voltage.
Leakage impedance: The leakage impedance of the converter transformer is
the principal component of commutating reactance, which limits the rate of rise of
loop current during the small overlap period when the current is transferred from
one valve (thyristor) to another. Thus, the leakage impedance helps in preventing
instantaneous current transfer which otherwise would result in high di/dt value
damaging the valves. The leakage impedance value has to be judiciously
selected; a higher value reduces the rate of rise of the loop current during the
current commutation process, but increases the overlap angle and reactive power
demand of converters. The permissible tolerance on the impedance value of the
converter transformers is usually lower than the conventional transformers so that
the distortion in DC voltage waveform and the non-characteristic harmonics are
reduced.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

423

DC Bushings: Creepage requirements of DC bushings are higher. The DC
creepage withstand of an insulator can be about 30% lower than the AC withstand.
While for conventional transformers, a creepage distance of about 31 mm/kV is
specified for very heavily polluted areas, the creepage distance of as high as 40
mm/kV may be specified for DC bushings in converter transformers.
Harmonics: One of the most severe duties of converter transformers is the
presence of harmonics. Due to harmonics, eddy losses in windings and stray losses
in structural components are higher in the converter transformers as compared to
the conventional transformers. For a 6-pulse operation, the harmonics generated
are 6k±1, where k is an integer. For a 12-pulse operation, the harmonics generated
are 12k±1. Thus, the higher the pulse number the higher is the frequency of the
lowest order harmonic produced. But as the pulse number increases, the number of
transformers required is more and also the complexity of transformer connections
increases. For a 24-pulse operation, use of zigzag windings or extended delta
connection is required.
Under normal operating conditions, the current in the converter transformer
windings is of stepped form. It is still AC current since it is symmetrical about the
x axis. Non-uniformity or asymmetry of valve firing angles produces DC
magnetization of the transformer core increasing the magnetizing current, and the
windings carry a DC current corresponding to the level of DC magnetization.
Although with modern firing controls, the DC magnetization is much lower, a
careful design of the magnetic circuit is necessary to avoid excessive losses and
noise in the core.
Due to harmonics and the possibility of some DC magnetization, the operating
flux density in the converter transformer is less than the conventional transformer
and its value is around 1.6 Tesla.
The higher harmonic content produces greater noise, and some special
measures for noise control may be required as described in Chapter 10.
The leakage field in the converter transformer contains appreciable harmonic
content which results into higher eddy loss in windings and structural parts. The
eddy loss in windings can be controlled by using subdivided conductors or CTC
(continuously transposed cable) conductor. If the CTC conductor is used, it is
usually of epoxy bonded type for higher short circuit strength as explained in
Chapter 6. The magnetic or eddy current shielding techniques, discussed in
Chapter 5, have to be used to minimize losses and to eliminate hot spots in the
tank and other structural components. Short circuit losses have been measured on
a 213 MVA single-phase converter transformer at a number of frequencies between
60 Hz and 6 kHz and harmonic load loss factors are reported in [21] for accounting
extra losses due to harmonics.
Short circuit withstand: Due to possibility of valve mal-operation resulting into
high currents, the short circuit withstand design of the converter transformer
deserves more attention than the conventional transformer. Quality of processing
(drying and impregnation) and integrity of clamping/support structures have to

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

424

Chapter 11

be ensured. The windings of the converter transformer need to be adequately
braced. The current density of the windings can be lower to enhance the short
circuit withstand strength.

11.3 Furnace Transformers
A transformer supplying arc furnace has to deliver an unusually high current over
a wide range of voltage. The power ratings between 50 to 100 MVA are quite
common now with the secondary currents of more than 50 kA. The furnace
transformer has special features for handling very high currents as compared to the
conventional transformer.
The arc furnace has three electrodes connected to the secondary terminals of
the furnace transformer. The furnace transformer has to be specially designed to
withstand frequent short circuits on the secondary side. Currents drawn in the arc
furnace are characterized by wide fluctuations and unbalanced conditions, which
lead to problems of voltage drops, harmonics, etc. These effects can be mitigated
by supplying furnaces directly from a high voltage transmission line having high
capacity (adequate fault level at the supply point) through a furnace transformer.
In such a case, when the voltage ratio is quite large, suitable measures should be
taken for protecting the secondary winding against the electrostatically
transferred voltages from the high voltage primary winding. These measures are,
viz. connection of a surge arrester or capacitor between the secondary terminals
and ground, placement of electrostatic shield between the primary and secondary
windings, etc.
The leakage reactance of the furnace transformer affects the furnace operation
since it gets added to the reactance of the high current connections between the
transformer secondary terminals and the electrode tips. The higher the reactance,
the lower the useful service currents are, thereby reducing the efficiency of the
operation. Hence, the leakage reactance needs to be kept as small as practically
possible with due consideration to the mechanical design of windings and
clamping/support structures. However, a certain minimum value of reactance is
required in the furnace circuit to stabilize arc. In large furnace installations, the
low voltage connections usually provide the necessary reactance. For smaller
installations, a reactor may have to be added in series with the primary winding to
give sufficient reactance value for the stability. These series reactors, which may
be housed in the tank of furnace transformer, are usually provided with taps so that
the reactance value can be varied for an optimum performance. Hence, depending
on the rating of furnace installation and its inherent reactance, the leakage
reactance of the furnace transformer has to be judiciously selected to meet the
stability and efficiency requirements.
Although the core-type construction is common, the shell-type construction is
also used [22] because one can get a desired low impedance value by suitably
interleaving the primary and secondary windings. The furnace transformers are
provided with a separate regulating (tap) winding. The variation of percentage

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

425

reactance over the entire tapping range depends on the disposition of windings.
The effects of various dispositions on the percentage reactance and the
performance of furnace are analyzed in [23].
The melting process of a furnace requires initially more power to break down
and melt the furnace charge. The power required afterwards for refining the molten
metal is lower. The variable power input requirement is achieved by varying the
supply voltage to electric arc furnace over a wide range continuously by use of
OLTC. Its use is a must where temporary interruption of supply for changing taps
(in off-circuit tap changer) is not desirable. Since the regulation required is quite
fine, an OLTC with a large number of steps is required. Due to frequent operations,
its oil quality should be regularly checked. It is preferable to place OLTC in a
separate compartment so that its maintenance can be carried out without having to
lower the oil to the extent that windings get exposed [24].
The commonly used arrangements for the voltage regulation are shown in
figure 11.9. The arrangement (a), which consists of taps at the neutral end of the
primary winding, is used for low rating furnace transformers (5 to 10 MVA). The
cost of OLTC is minimum due to lower voltage and current values (the primary
voltage may be of the order of 33 or 66 kV). The disadvantage of this arrangement
is that the step voltage is not constant throughout the range of voltage regulation
(for a fixed primary voltage, when the tap position is changed for varying the
secondary voltage, the voltage per turn changes which results in a non-uniform
change in the secondary voltage from one tap to another).
The arrangement (b), used for larger furnace applications, eliminates the
disadvantage of the previous arrangement. A separate autotransformer is used for
the voltage regulation. The step voltage is uniform throughout since the voltage
per turn is independent of tap position for a fixed input voltage applied to the
primary of autotransformer. The autotransformer, which may be supplied directly
from a system at 66 or 132 kV, reduces the voltage down to the level of the primary
winding of the furnace transformer. The OLTC voltage class is higher than that of
arrangement (a) and three single-phase tap changers may have to be used. Also, the
autotransformer and furnace transformer are usually housed in separate tanks
thereby increasing the cost and size of the total system.
The most popular arrangement used for medium and large power furnace
applications is the furnace transformer with a booster arrangement as shown in
figure 11.9 (c). The booster transformer on the output side boosts or bucks the
fixed secondary voltage of the main transformer. The primary winding of the
booster transformer is supplied from the tap winding of the main transformer, and
the supply voltage is selected such that it results in the least onerous operating
conditions for the OLTC. Hence, the OLTC cost is quite low in this arrangement.
Also, the variation of secondary voltage is same from one tap position to another
throughout the range of regulation. Usually, the main and booster transformers are
placed in the same tank minimizing the length of connections between the
secondary windings of both the transformers. The amount of structural steel
required is also reduced.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

426

Figure 11.9 Types of furnace transformer

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Chapter 11

Special Transformers

427

The booster transformer rating is much smaller than that of the main
transformer, being sufficient for the regulation purpose only. Although the core
diameters (and core area) are different, the magnetic circuits of the two
transformers have generally the same center-to-center distance and equal window
heights to facilitate the connections between their secondary windings. If one
wants to reduce the core material content, the center-to-center distance of the
booster transformer can be lower, but the connections become a bit more difficult.
Since the currents of the secondary windings of the main and booster transformers
are equal, the same conductor type and size is generally used for both the
windings. Also, the two windings are often connected by a figure of eight (figure
11.10) avoiding the extra connections between them. A special lifting
arrangement is required to lift the two core-winding assemblies simultaneously.
Since the current carried by the secondary windings is quite high, a
continuously transposed cable (CTC) conductor is used which minimizes the
eddy losses, gets rid of the transposition problems and improves the winding
space factor. The material of structural parts supporting high current terminations
and tank parts in the vicinity of high current field should be non-magnetic steel.
Analysis of a high current termination in a large furnace transformer is reported in
[25] wherein excessive losses and hot spots observed during the tests have been
analyzed by 3-D FEM analysis. Suitable modifications of magnetic clearances
and material type eliminated the hot spots.

Figure 11.10 Figure of eight connection

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

428

Chapter 11

The secondary winding of a furnace transformer is made up of a number of
parallel coils arranged vertically and connected by vertical copper bars. The goand-return arrangement is used for input and output connections (placed close to
each other) reducing the magnetic field and associated stray losses in the nearby
structural parts. A delta connected secondary winding is preferable since the
current to be carried by it is reduced. Many times, both the ends of each phase of
the secondary winding are brought out through the terminals and the delta
connections are made at the furnace (get automatically formed by the metallic
charge in the furnace). This minimizes the inductive voltage drops in the leads
and can achieve a better phase balance between the electrode currents. Due to
heavy connections, some unbalance may exist which has to be minimized by
some specific arrangements [23]. The secondary winding terminals are usually
located on the vertical side of the tank (instead of top cover) resulting in the
reduced length of connections, stray losses and cost of the transformer. The LV
(secondary) winding is invariably the outermost winding and the HV (primary)
winding can be placed next to the core. In such a case, the regulating (tap)
winding is in between the HV and LV windings. Such a winding disposition
reduces the variation of percentage impedance (short circuit voltage) as the tap
position is changed from the minimum to maximum value in variable flux
designs.
Small furnace transformers are naturally cooled with radiators. For large ratings
and where there are space restrictions, forced oil cooling with an oil-to-water heat
exchanger can be used. The oil pressure is always maintained higher than the
water pressure (so that water does not leak into oil if a leakage problem develops).
The LV terminations may be of U shaped copper tubes of certain inside and
outside diameters so that they can be water cooled from the inside. These copper
tubes can be cooled by oil also [24].

11.4 Phase Shifting Transformers
A phase shifting transformer (PST) is used to control the active power flow in a
complex power transmission network in a very efficient way. The PST has long
been used to improve the transient stability of the power systems [26]. It has been
successfully used to control and increase the power flow between two large
systems [27]; in this case the option of using PST was finalized after its
comparison with the other options, viz. HVDC link and series capacitors. The PST
provides a well defined phase shift (advance or retard) between the primary
(source) and secondary (load) terminals as shown in figure 11.11. In the phaseadvance mode, the voltage vector at the output of the PST is made to lead the
input voltage vector by adding a leading quadrature voltage to the source
voltage. In the phase-retard mode, a lagging quadrature voltage is added to the
source voltage so that the voltage vector at the output of the PST lags the input
voltage.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

429

Figure 11.11 Advance mode and retard mode

Normally, this phase shift can be varied during operation in definite steps by use
of an on-load tap changer (OLTC). The sign of the phase shift can be inverted
(advance to retard mode and vice versa) with OLTC having the reversing switch.
These transformers can be constructed with many different winding
configurations depending on the rated voltage, power output and amount of
phase shift.
The rated design (equivalent) power which decides the size of PST is given by
[28]
S eq =3×{V ph ×2sin( α /2)}×I SL =3V ph I SL ×2sin( α /2)

(11.10)

where Vph is the line-to-ground voltage, ISL is the line current flowing from source
to load, and the term in brackets is the voltage across the winding (between S and
L terminals) expressed in terms of the phase shift angle α. Hence, the required
maximum value of phase shift angle decides the rating and size of PST. Depending
on the voltage/power rating, phase shift angle requirements, connected system’s
short circuit capability and OLTC performance, two distinct designs of PST are
used, viz. single-core design and double-core design.
The less complex single-core design is generally used at lower voltages for
small phase shifts and small ratings of PST. The figure 11.12 shows the
arrangement of PST with a delta connected exciting winding. In this
configuration, the regulating windings are wound on the same core limb as the
exciting winding. The phase shift between the source (S) and load (L) terminals is
achieved by connecting the regulating winding as shown in the figure. Its voltage
is in phase with that of the exciting winding between the other two phase
terminals. The voltage magnitudes of S and L terminals are equal under the noload condition. The phasor diagram shows the phase shift advancement obtained
for the load terminal voltage with respect to the source terminal voltage. If the
OLTC with reversing switch is used, one can get phase advance as well as phase
retard.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

430

Chapter 11

Figure 11.12 Delta configuration of PST and phasor diagram

A special case of the configuration shown in figure 11.12 is the design with
only one tap winding and one OLTC with reversing switch, which can be used for
smaller phase shifts.

Figure 11.13 Delta-hexagonal PST (with retard phase shift)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

431

Another configuration which uses the single-core design is shown in figure
11.13. The arrangement is known as delta-hexagonal PST which generally has
OLTC with linear regulation, i.e., without a reversing switch. The regulating
winding is wound on the same core limb as the main exciting winding. The
regulating winding of R phase is located between phases Y and B, and produces a
phase shift (retard) as shown in the figure.
The two configurations of the single-core design discussed are the cases of line
end regulation. The tap changer and regulating (tap) winding are directly exposed
to system disturbances (overvoltages and short circuit currents). Hence, the cost of
OLTC increases. Additional impedances may have to be connected to the load
side terminals to protect the tap changer from short circuit currents because no
transformer impedance is present at phase angle of zero. If OLTC with reversing
switch is used in the arrangement shown in figure 11.12, during the switch
operation the tap winding gets momentarily disconnected from the main winding.
Its potential is decided by the potentials of adjacent windings and the
capacitances (between windings and between windings and ground). This
problem of high recovery voltage can be tackled [28,29] by use of shields between
windings or by use of tie-in resistor (which connects the tap winding to a fixed
potential during the reversing operation).
The two-core design shown in figure 11.14 is popularly used for large PST
ratings and larger range of phase angle shift. This type of PST basically consists of
the series unit and the exciting unit, which are enclosed in separate tanks. When
the design is used for smaller ratings and lower voltages, both the units can be
enclosed in the same tank.
The winding of the series unit, between the source and load terminals, is split
into two halves, and the main winding of the exciting unit is connected to the
connection point of these two split windings. The advantage of this arrangement
is that the tap winding in the exciting unit and the winding aa’ in the series unit
can be designed independently (windings AA’ and BB’ form a part of HV network).
The voltage level of the tap winding and aa’ winding can be suitably chosen to
reduce the tap changer cost.
It is clear from the phasor diagram that with phase angle α the voltage VBB’ also
changes because the exciting winding (BB’) is located electrically in the middle
of the series winding. At the phase angle α=0°, the voltage VAA' becomes zero and
the three voltages VSR, VLR and VBB’ become equal. Thus, the condition α=0° gives
the highest exciting voltage VBB’, and the corresponding voltage at the tap
winding also reaches a maximum value. The OLTC has to be designed for the step
voltage corresponding to this highest voltage.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

432

Chapter 11

Figure 11.14 Commonly used configuration for two-core design PST

In order to get rapid and smooth control of power flow, static phase shifters can
be used, which employ tap changers consisting of static devices like thyristors.
One such scheme, reported in [30], is shown to minimize the subsynchronous
resonance in large turbine-generators resulted due to capacitive series
compensation of lines. Applications of static phase shifters in power systems are
reported in [31]. The most of the dynamic characteristics of a static phase shifter
can be achieved by augmenting an existing conventional phase shifter with a
small size static phase shifter (thus giving a hybrid phase shifter).
The calculation of currents in the phase shifting transformers under system
fault conditions requires more elaborate treatment as compared to that in the
conventional transformers. The equivalent circuit model and the positivesequence, negative-sequence and zero-sequence networks required for the fault

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

433

analysis are given in [32]. The method is used to calculate currents under various
fault conditions.

References
1. Schaefer, J. Rectifier circuits: theory and design, John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1965.
2. Pelikan, T. and Isler, J. Rectifier transformers for heavy currents, The Brown
Boveri Review, Vol. 48, No.3/4, March/April 1961, pp. 215–228.
3. Wells, R. Rectifier interphase transformers and current balance, Electrical
Review, Vol. 207, No. 14, October 1980, pp. 45–46.
4. Coppadoro, F. Voltage regulation of transformers for silicon rectifiers, Brown
Boveri Review, Vol. 8–72, August 1972, pp. 416–421.
5. Andersen, O.W. Large transformers for power electronic loads, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 12, No. 4, October 1997, pp. 1532–
1537.
6. Copper Development Association, Copper for busbars, Publication 22, June
1996, p. 53.
7. Crepaz, S. For an improved evaluation of conventional losses of transformers
for converters, IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, Vol. IA–11, No.
2, March/April 1975, pp. 165–171.
8. Kasermann, P. Oerlikon rectifier transformers, Bulletin Oerlikon, No. 336/
337, 1959, pp. 134–139.
9. Arrillaga, J. High voltage direct current transmission, Peter Peregrinus Ltd.,
London, 1983.
10. Kimbark, E.W. Direct current transmission, John Wiley and Sons, New York,
1971.
11. Tschudi, D.J. DC insulation design: paper-oil insulation systems, WICOR
Insulation Conference, Rapperswil, Switzerland, September 1996.
12. Ganger, B., Falkenhagen, H., and Kury, H. Contributions to the problem of
insulation stresses in HVDC converter transformers, Direct Current, Vol. 2,
No. 1, February 1971, pp. 15–29.
13. Takahashi, E., Tsutsumi, Y., Okuyama, K., and Ogata, F. Partial discharge
characteristics of oil-immersed insulation systems under DC, combined ACDC and DC reversed polarity voltage, IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus
and Systems, Vol. PAS-95, No. 1, January/February 1976, pp. 411–420.
14. Kurita, K., Hyuga, S., Ikemoto, N., Oka, Y., Sudo, Y., Hirano, M., Kako, Y., and
Kiwaki, H. Converter transformer, DC reactor and transductors for 125 kV
37.5 MW thyristor converter, Hitachi Review, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 146–156.
15. Hessen, P. and Lampe, W. Insulating problems in HVDC converter transformers,
Direct Current, Vol. 2, No. 1, February 1971, pp. 30–44.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

434

Chapter 11

16. Wahlstrom, B. Voltage tests on transformers and smoothing reactors for HVDC
transmission, Electra, Report No. 46, 1976, pp. 19–38.
17. Kull, U. The behavior of a laminated oil-paper dielectric with high direct
voltages, The Brown Boveri Review, Vol. 55, No. 4/5, April/May 1968, pp.
215–221.
18. Ohshima, I., Motegi, S., Honda, M., Yanari, T., and Ebisawa, Y. HVDC
breakdown of transformer oil and the effect of space charge on it, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-102, No. 7, July
1983, pp. 2208–2215.
19. Ganger, B.E. The breakdown voltage of oil gaps with high DC voltage, IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-87, No. 10, October
1968, pp. 1840–1843.
20. Hasegawa, T., Yamaji, K., Hatano, M., Kouan, T., and Hosokawa, N. Dielectric
strength of transformer insulation at DC polarity reversal, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. 12, No. 4, October 1997, pp. 1526–1531.
21. Forrest, J. Harmonic load losses in HVDC converter transformers, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 6, No. 1, January 1991, pp. 153–157.
22. Grundmark, B. Large furnace transformers, ASEA Journal, December 1972,
pp. 151–156.
23. Bonis, P. and Coppadoro, F. Transformers for arc furnaces, Brown Boveri Review,
Vol. 60, No. 10/11–73, October/November 1973, pp. 456–467.
24. Hochart, B. Power transformer handbook, Butterworth and Co. Ltd., London,
1987.
25. Koppikar, D.A., Kulkarni, S.V., Khaparde, S.A., and Jha, S.K. Evaluation of
eddy losses due to high current leads in transformers, Proceedings IEE—
Science Measurement and Technology, Vol. 144, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 34–
38.
26. O’Kelly, D. and Musgrave, G. Improvement of power-system transient stability
by phase shift insertion, Proceedings IEE, Vol. 120, No. 2, February 1973, pp.
247–252.
27. Patel, B.K., Smith, H.S., Hewes, T.S., and Marsh, W.J. Application of phase
shifting transformers for Daniel-Mcknight 500 KV interconnection, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-1, No. 3, July 1986, pp. 167–
173.
28. IEEE Standard C57.135–2001™, IEEE guide for the application, specification,
and testing of phase-shifting transformers.
29. Kramer, A. and Ruff, J. Transformers for phase angle regulation considering
the selection of on-load tap changers, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
Vol. 13, No. 2, April 1998, pp. 518–525.
30. Iravani, M.R. and Mathur, R.M. Damping subsynchronous oscillations in
power systems using a static phase shifter, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
Vol. PWRS-1, No. 2, May 1986, pp. 76–83.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Special Transformers

435

31. Iravani, M.R., Dandeno, P.L., Nguyen, K.H., Zhu, D., and Maratukulam, D.
Applications of static phase shifters in power systems, IEEE Transactions on
Power Delivery, Vol. 9, No. 3, July 1994, pp. 1600–1608.
32. Del Vecchio, R.M., Poulin, B., Feghali, P.T., Shah, D.M., and Ahuja R. Power
transformer design principles: with applications to core-form power
transformers, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Canada, 2001, pp.
499–542.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

12
Recent Trends in Transformer
Technology

In the last one decade, rapid changes and developments are being witnessed in the
transformer design, analysis, manufacturing and condition monitoring
technologies. The technological leap is likely to continue for the forthcoming
years with the simultaneous increase in the power rating and size of transformers.
There is ongoing trend to go for higher system voltages for transmission which
increase the voltage rating of the transformers. The phenomenal growth of power
systems has put up tremendous responsibilities on the transformer industry to
supply reliable and cost-effective transformers. Any failure of a transformer or its
component will not only impair the system performance but it also has a serious
social impact. The reliability of transformers is a major concern to users and
manufacturers for ensuring a trouble-free performance during the service. The
transformer as a system consists of several components such as core, windings,
insulation, tank, accessories, etc. It is absolutely necessary that integrity of all
these components individually and as a system is ensured for a long life of the
transformer.
The chapter identifies the recent trends in research and development in active
materials, insulation systems, computational techniques, accessories, diagnostic
techniques and life estimation/refurbishment. The challenges in design and
manufacture of the transformers are also identified.

12.1 Magnetic Circuit
There has been a steady development of core steel material in the last century from
non oriented steels to scribed grain oriented steels. The trend of reduction in
437
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

438

Chapter 12

transformer core losses in the last few decades is related to a considerable increase
in energy costs. One of the ways to reduce the core losses is to use better and
thinner grades of core steels. Presently, the lowest thickness of commercially
available steel is 0.23 mm. Although the loss is lower, the core-building time
increases for the thinner grades. The price of the thinner grades is also higher.
Despite these disadvantages, core materials with still lower thicknesses will be
available and used in the future.
The commercial materials can be divided into three distinct groups: non
oriented, grain oriented and rapidly quenched alloys [1]. The amorphous
magnetic alloys, typically available in thickness of 0.025 to 0.05 mm, are part of
the third group. The loss of amorphous materials is quite low; about 30% of cold
rolled grain oriented (CRGO) steel materials, because of their high resistivity and
low thickness. Due to their non-crystalline nature (low anisotropy), the flux
distribution is more uniform in them as compared to the CRGO materials.
However, they are costlier and have low saturation magnetization (~1.58 T as
compared to 2.0 T for CRGO). The maximum operating flux density for
amorphous cores is therefore limited to about 1.35 T. Hence, although the core
(no-load) loss is substantially low, the size and cost of the core increases, and the
load loss is also higher. Therefore, the use of amorphous material is attractive
when users specify a high no-load loss capitalization ($per kW). The space factor
of the amorphous material is lower than the CRGO material. The amorphous
materials are very sensitive to mechanical stresses; the core loss increases
significantly with the stress. Also, they have a limited operating temperature range
as compared to the CRGO materials. The properties of amorphous metals, viz.
thinness, lower space factor, hardness and brittleness, pose design and
manufacturing problems for the mass production of distribution transformers [2].
Distribution transformers up to 2.5 MVA have been made with amorphous core.
Automation of core assembly process is desirable to make the amorphous core
transformers cost-effective and to improve their performance.

12.2 Windings
There has been no significant change in the type of winding conductors used in
distribution and power transformers. The rectangular strip or bunch conductors
and continuously transposed cable (CTC) conductors are used for windings of
power transformers. Foils of either copper or aluminum may find preference for the
LV winding of distribution transformers. The CTC conductor is preferably of
epoxy bonded type for greater short circuit strength. There have been some
attempts [3] to improve the winding space factor significantly by using a cable in
which a number of parallel rectangular insulated conductors are bonded edge-toedge with epoxy. It is reported that there is significant reduction in transformer
losses and weight when this type of cable conductor is used.
Recently, HV cable technology, used for power transmission and
distribution, has been applied to transformers windings [4]. It results into a dry

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

439

type transformer without oil with a current density lower than that of the
conventional oil cooled transformer. The conductor consists of an innermost
bundled conductor surrounded by a thin semi-conducting layer resulting into a
more uniform field around the conductor. This semi-conductor layer is then
surrounded by cross-linked polyethylene whose thickness depends on the
voltage class. There is also an outermost semi-conducting layer which is earthed
on each turn along the winding. Thus, the electric field is totally contained in
the insulation. A special arrangement of forced air cooling is used. It is reported
that the dielectric, mechanical and thermal design of windings can be done
independently giving more flexibility for optimizing these functions. It is also
claimed that the transformers manufactured by this technology will be more
efficient, reliable and eco-friendly. The comparison of their cost with that of the
conventional oil cooled transformers and their commercial viability are not yet
reported.
Superconducting transformers: Advent of high-temperature superconducting
(HTS) materials has renewed interest in research and development of
superconducting transformers. Previously developed low-temperature
superconductors (LTS) required cooling by liquid helium to about 4°K, which was
quite expensive. The development of technology based on liquid nitrogen (LN2)
at temperatures up to 79°K has reduced the complexity and cost of the
superconducting transformers [5]. Some of the most promising HTS materials are
based on Bismuth compounds (BISCCO) and Yttrium compounds (YBCO). The
principal advantages of HTS transformers are: much lower winding material
content and losses (current density value of at least 10 times that of the
conventional oil cooled transformers can be used), higher overload capacity up to
about 2.0 per-unit current and possibility of coreless design [6].
Although HTS transformers have higher overload capacity, they have a very
low through-fault sustaining capability due to small thermal mass. It is proposed
in [7] that a conventional transformer can be operated in parallel with a HTS
transformer. The HTS transformer is normally connected, and under through fault
conditions it is disconnected and the conventional transformer is switched in
immediately. The arrangement is shown to be more cost-effective (with lifetime
costing) as compared to the parallel arrangement of two conventional
transformers. In [8], it is suggested to use the HTS transformer as a current limiting
device to limit the through-fault currents. During the fault conditions, the
transition from the superconducting to normal conducting mode occurs
increasing the resistance.
Due to greatly reduced conductor dimensions, the strength of the
superconducting winding against radial and axial short circuit forces is inherently
quite low. The series capacitance also reduces due to reduction in winding
dimensions whereas the ground capacitance is not significantly affected. This
results into a very non-uniform voltage distribution. Special countermeasures
(e.g., interleaving) need to be taken which increase the complexity of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

440

Chapter 12

construction. Although there is a possibility for optimization, certain minimum
clearances between windings are required to get the specified leakage impedance.
The main challenges of superconducting transformers are: short circuit withstand,
through-fault recovery and withstand against high voltage tests (particularly the
impulse test).
For efficient cooling, it is desirable to have a direct contact between LN
2
coolant and the conductor; hence in some designs the inter-turn insulation is
arranged in such a way that the conductor edges are left as bare. Windings of each
phase may be kept in a separate cryostat (made of fiberglass) and the tap winding
is generally kept outside the cryostat to simplify the overall construction [5]. The
tap winding and core may be cooled by forced gas cooling in which case it
becomes oil-less, fire-hazard free and eco-friendly transformer.
There is a considerable amount of research and development work currently
being done to make the superconducting transformers commercially viable. A
development of three-phase 100 kVA superconducting transformer with
amorphous core has been reported in [9]. A design feasibility study for a 240 MVA
HTS autotransformer has been reported in [5]. With the rapid development in
technology, the availability of commercial units is certainly on the horizon. The
prototype HTS transformers of rating 30/60 MVA are being developed [10] for
their use by utilities in the year 2005. The commercial units may be available
thereafter.

12.3 Insulation
Low permittivity pressboard: If pressboard with low permittivity (around that of
oil) is developed and if it is commercially made available, a more uniform electric
stress distribution can be obtained opening avenues for insulation optimization
as discussed in Chapter 8.
Gas insulated transformers: There is considerable progress in the technology of
gas immersed transformers in the last one decade. Unlike the oil-immersed
transformers, they have SF6 gas for the insulation and cooling purposes. Initially,
SF6 transformers were manufactured in small ratings (10 to 20 MVA). Now, the
ratings as high as 275 kV, 300 MVA are quite common in some parts of the world.
SF6 gas has excellent dielectric strength and thermal/mechanical stability. It is
non-flammable and hence the main advantage of SF6 transformers is that they are
fire-hazard free. Hence, these are suited for operation in the areas with a high fire
risk. Due to lower specific gravity of SF6 gas, the gas insulated transformer is
generally lighter than the oil insulated transformer. The dielectric strength of SF6
gas is about two to three times that of air at atmospheric pressure and is
comparable to that of the oil at about two to three atmospheric pressure. But as the
operating gas pressure is increased, a tank with higher strength is required
increasing its weight and cost.
Constructional features of SF6 transformer are not very much different than the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

441

oil-immersed transformer. The core of SF6 transformer is almost the same as that of
the oil-immersed transformer. It usually has higher number of cooling ducts since
the cooling is not as effective as that with the oil. Typical insulation over
conductor is polyethylene terephthalate (PET). This material does not react with
SF6 gas and permits higher temperature rise as compared to the oil-immersed
transformer. The impulse strength ratio (strength for impulse test divided by
strength for AC test) is lower for SF6 gas as compared to the oil-pressboard
insulation system. Hence, the clearances in SF6 transformers get mostly decided
by the impulse withstand considerations [11] and the methods have to be used
which improve the series capacitance of windings. The ratio of the permittivity of
SF6 to that of the solid insulation is lower than the corresponding ratio between
the oil and solid insulation; this results into higher stress in SF6 gas than that in
the oil. The duct spacers with lower permittivity may have to be used in the major
insulation [12] to reduce the stress in the small SF6 gaps at the corners of winding
conductors. The heat capacity of the gas is smaller than that of the oil and the
thermal time constant is also smaller reducing the overload capacity of SF6
transformers as compared to the oil-immersed transformers. Due to the lower
cooling ability of SF6 gas, a large volume of gas has to be circulated by gas
blowers; this may increase the noise level of the transformers. For large capacity
transformers, perflurocarbons may be used [13] for adequate cooling, and SF6 gas
is used only as the insulating medium. But the construction becomes
complicated; hence even for large capacity transformers, SF6 gas has been used as
the insulation as well as the cooling medium [14]. Due to higher thermal stability
of SF6 gas and quite a high value of temperature at which it decomposes, the
dissolved gas analysis is not as easy as in the case of oil-immersed transformers to
detect incipient faults [15]. The challenges which have to be overcome for the
widespread use of SF6 transformers are viz. environmental concerns, sealing
problems, lower cooling capability and present high cost of manufacture.

12.4 Challenges in Design and Manufacture of Transformers
Stray loss control: There is continuous increase in ratings of generator
transformers and autotransformers. Hence, one of the challenges is to accurately
evaluate stray losses for their optimization (to have competitive/compact
designs) and for elimination of hot spots. Advanced 3-D numerical techniques are
being used to optimize stray losses in the windings and structural parts of large
transformers. These techniques along with the stray loss control methods are
described in Chapter 5. Even in small distribution transformers, the shielding
methods are being adopted to reduce the stray losses [16].
Short circuit withstand: A steady increase in unit ratings of transformers and
simultaneous growth of short circuit capacities of networks have made short
circuit withstand as one of the most important aspects of the power transformer
design. The short circuit test failure rate is high for large transformers. In fact, the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

442

Chapter 12

short circuit performance of transformers has been a preferential subject in a
number of CIGRE conferences including the recent year 2000 conference.
Although the static force and withstand calculations are well-established, efforts
are being made to standardize and improve the dynamic short circuit calculations.
The precautions that can be taken at the specification, design and manufacturing
stages of transformers for improvement in short circuit withstand have been
elaborated in Chapter 6.
Part winding resonance: There are a number of high voltage power transformer
failures attributed to this phenomenon as described in Chapter 7. Factory and field
tests with non-standard waveshapes and terminal conditions (simulating site
conditions) reveal that the transient voltages could be developed across a section
of a winding (e.g., tap section) significantly in excess of those during the standard
tests. Switching operations and line faults at some distance from the transformer
terminals are mainly responsible for such overvoltages within the transformer
windings. Accurate simulation of transformers under such conditions by their
designers and a greater cooperation between manufacturers and users are essential
to avoid the part winding resonance.
Very fast transient overvoltages: Very fast transient overvoltages (VFTO) can be
generated by switching operations and fault conditions in gas insulated
substations (GIS). The behaviour of a transformer subjected to VFTO has been a
topic of intensive research in the recent past. In the worst case, VFTO with a rise
time of 10 ns and amplitude of 2.5 per-unit is possible. This steep fronted section
of the wave is often followed by an oscillatory component having frequency in
the range of 1 to 10 MHz [17]. It not only leads to severe intersection/inter-turn
voltages (due to highly nonlinear voltage distribution) but it may also produce a
part-winding resonance. The knowledge of voltage distribution across inter-turn
insulation is essential for transformers exposed to very fast transient overvoltages.
For this, it is necessary to represent individual winding turns in the simulation
models for the evaluation of very high frequency performance of the winding.
Geomagnetic disturbances: Although the effects of solar-geomagnetic activity
on power system and equipment were known, the failure of large generator step-up
transformer in 1989 during a solar-geomagnetic disturbance created a great
concern and apprehension about the effects of geomagnetic currents on
transformers. Magnitude and location of geomagnetic currents are very difficult
to predict with any degree of accuracy [18]. Under normal excitation conditions,
the exciting ampere-turns are less than 0.5% (of rated ampere-turns) for large
transformers. Hence, even a small value of geomagnetically induced (excitation)
current dramatically changes the field pattern and applies a DC bias to the core
flux. During solar-geomagnetic disturbances, DC currents flow in low resistance
paths via neutrals of transformers and transmission lines as a result of earth surface
potentials. Because of the location of the north magnetic pole with respect to the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

443

north geographic pole, the regions of North America with low earth conductivity
generally have high values of earth surface potential, and the transformers in these
regions are vulnerable to the geomagnetic effects [19]. The DC currents may
saturate the core completely which increases the excitation current drawn
manifold (rich in even and odd harmonics). The stray losses in structural parts can
increase to excessive values generating hot spots. Due to heavy field distortion,
transposition scheme (decided based on usual leakage field which is
predominantly axial) used in a winding with parallel conductors becomes
ineffective resulting into unacceptable circulating current values. Due to different
zero-sequence impedance characteristics, the three-phase three-limb transformers
are less prone to geomagnetically induced saturation as compared to single-phase
three-limb or three-phase five-limb transformers [18].
The duration of a geomagnetic activity can be quite high, lasting for repeat
periods of several hours over a several day time span [20], which may result into
long durations of overheating with a significant loss of transformer life. The
transformer impedance changes drastically due to field distortion and harmonics.
As a result, the reactive power associated with the transformer changes. This
criterion is used in the monitoring program reported in [21] for protection of
transformers from the geomagnetic effects. For mitigating the geomagnetic effects
the methods which use active and passive devices are described in [19].
Static electrification: This phenomenon has been identified as the cause of failure
of few power transformers with directed flow forced oil cooling. Considerable
amount of work has been done in recent past to identify the factors influencing the
charge separation phenomenon (see Chapter 9). The methods of avoiding/
suppressing the static electrification are now known and practiced by the
manufacturers.
Noise level prediction and control: Transformer noise is attracting attention as a
result of the growing concern about the environment. While the trend of ever
increasing ratings implies higher transformer noise, the noise-reducing measures
can be adopted which make the transformer quieter. By using modern design
methods and materials, noise emissions can be economically lowered to
acceptable levels. The modal analysis, finite element method and sound intensity
measurement provide the necessary know-why and know-how. The noise level
prediction is a complex coupled field problem as highlighted in the next section.
The noise reduction techniques have been discussed in Chapter 10.

12.5 Computer-Aided Design and Analysis
With the rapid development of computational tools, the routine design
calculations can be efficiently programmed. Within a matter of few minutes,
today’s computer can work out thousands of designs to give the optimum design.
With the ever increasing competition, there are continuous efforts to optimize the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

444

Chapter 12

material cost of transformers. In most of the contracts, the transformers have to be
delivered in a short period of time, and hence the speed of design and manufacture
of the transformers is the key issue. Therefore, it should be ensured that the process
of optimization does not lead to non-standard designs. The standardization not
only reduces the engineering efforts but it also enhances the quality and
reliability of the transformers. The standardization enables the use of drafting
software packages which can generate manufacturing instructions and drawings
thereby reducing the engineering design time drastically.
The main benefit to a transformer designer, due to modern computers, is in the
area of analysis. The transformer is a multi-phase and three-dimensional
structure having materials with nonlinear characteristics and anisotropic
properties. Superimposition of various physical fields poses a real challenge to
the designer. Many times, there are conflicting design requirements for these
fields. For example, if the corner radius of a rectangular winding conductor is
increased for reducing the dielectric stress, the short circuit strength may reduce.
The design of conductor paper insulation (conflict between dielectric design
and thermal design), design of supporting structures (conflict between stray loss
control and structural design), etc. are some other examples. Due to geometric
and material complexities, numerical methods are used for solution of such
engineering problems (electrostatic, electromagnetic, structural, thermal, etc.).
The Finite Element Method (FEM) is the most popular numerical method, and
many commercial 2-D and 3-D FEM packages are available. Many
manufacturers develop their own customized FEM programs for optimization
and reliability enhancement of transformers. The 2-D FEM analysis, which is
widely used for stray loss estimation/control, winding temperature rise
calculations, short circuit force calculations, etc., can be integrated into the
main electrical design optimization program. As the voltage/current rating of
the transformer increases, it is very important to verify the new design using a
tool such as FEM. Due to the three-dimensional (and asymmetrical) nature of the
transformer structure, three-dimensional analysis is essential for more accurate
calculations even though it may be computationally very time consuming and
expensive.
The current research trends show that many of the complex design problems,
involving more than one physical field, are increasingly being solved by using
coupled field formulations [22]. The coupled field treatment is required for
problems in which the involved fields (e.g., electromagnetic and thermal)
interact either strongly or weakly. Hence, the coupled field problems can be
broadly classified as strongly (directly) and weakly (indirectly or sequentially)
coupled. This classification is mainly based on the degree of nonlinearity and
the relative time constants of the involved fields. A weakly coupled problem is
solved using cascaded algorithms; the fields (which are coupled) are solved in
the successive steps. The coupling is performed by applying the results from the
first analysis (involving only one field) as the loads for the second analysis
(which involves the other field). Thus, the problem is divided into sub-problems

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

445

which are solved sequentially in an iteration loop until the solution converges.
When the method of indirect coupling is used, good properties like
symmetricity, positive definiteness, etc. are preserved in the field coefficient
matrix. The advantage of using this method is that the development of the
formulation for each field can be done independently in a flexible and modular
fashion. In transformers, the problem of estimation of temperature rise of
conducting parts due to induced eddy currents is generally solved as a weakly
coupled problem [23] since the thermal time constant is much higher than the
electromagnetic time constant.
For strongly coupled problems, in which the interaction of coupled fields is
highly nonlinear and the involved fields have comparable time constants, the
governing equations are solved simultaneously with all the necessary variables.
Thus, all the physical aspects of the coupled fields are simultaneously managed.
The field-circuit coupling is also a type of strongly coupled problem. For
example, a transient 3-D field analysis of a transformer under a short circuit
condition is done in [24] by coupling magnetic field and electric circuit
equations. Analysis of load-controlled noise is done in [25] by using a
formulation in which the magnetic and structural fields are strongly coupled,
whereas the structural and acoustic fields are weakly coupled.

12.6 Monitoring and Diagnostics
Due to severe competition and restructuring taking place in the power industry,
there is need to reduce maintenance costs, operate transformers as much as
possible and prevent forced outages. Hence, in the recent years the monitoring
and diagnostics of transformers have attracted considerable attention. The
monitoring can be either off-line or on-line. The trend is more towards on-line
techniques due to continuous developments in computational/analysis tools and
information technology.
The monitoring not only detects the incipient faults but it also allows a change
from periodic to condition based maintenance [26]. It is important to identify the
key parameters that should be monitored to reduce the cost of the overall
monitoring system. The monitoring of transformers has several challenges, viz.
cost of monitors, reliability of electronic equipment, performance under adverse
field conditions and inadequate field expertise. There are a number of off-line and
on-line monitoring/diagnostic techniques which are currently being used and
developed further.
Dissolved gas analysis: It is the most established and proven method to detect
incipient faults. Different faults produce different gases; for example arcing,
overheated cellulose and partial discharges produce predominantly acetylene,
carbon oxides and hydrogen gas respectively. There are a number of established
dissolved gas interpretation methods/guidelines (IEEE, IEC, CIGRE, Rogers
method, etc.). Sensors are being developed to detect gases. There is enough

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

446

Chapter 12

experience available already with on-line hydrogen sensors. Portable units are
available which can detect presence of hydrogen in a sample of transformer oil,
which indicates the occurrence of partial discharges.
Partial discharges: Measurement of partial discharge (PD) occurring inside a
transformer is commonly done by either the acoustic technique or the electrical
technique. The acoustical sensors based on the Piezoelectric effect are less
expensive and the main advantage of the acoustic detection is that disturbing
signals from electric network do not interfere with the measurement. But the PD
detection is possible within a radius of about 200 to 300 mm from the source since
the acoustic signals are attenuated by the medium/materials through which they
travel. Hence, a number of acoustic sensors may have to be used which are
distributed carefully around the transformer. Acoustic sensors can also be placed
internally using wave guides (e.g., fiberglass rods) to enhance the strength of the
received signal, but the system is expensive and difficult to install.
The PD detection range for the electrical method is larger. It covers a wider area,
which includes for example tap changer and bushings. There is better correlation
between the instrument reading and the actual PD magnitude as compared to that
with the acoustic method. However, the measurements are generally hampered by
electrical interference signals from surrounding equipment.
Direct hot spot measurement: The direct winding hot spot temperature
measurement method, which uses fiber-optic sensors, is now increasingly used on
critical transformers for on-line monitoring. Since the measuring instrument is
costly, it can be used for transformers located in one substation/area by rotation (if
the fiber-optic sensors are installed and brought out for these transformers). The
technique is described in Chapter 9; the challenge for the transformer designer is
to predict the hot spot temperature (and the location) very close to the measured
values.
Degree of polymerization: This has a definite correlation with the mechanical
strength of paper insulation. Its measured value is used to study the phenomena of
aging and the corresponding influencing factors. The degree of polymerization
(DP), which has a value of about 1000 to 1400 for a new paper, drops to just about
200 for a severely aged paper. Temperature, oxygen and moisture are the main
degrading agents which reduce the value of DP. The main disadvantage of this
technique is that a paper-insulation sample is required to be taken from inside of
the transformer (generally from the lead insulation in the top portion of the
transformer) necessitating shut-down of the transformer.
Furan analysis: When cellulose materials (paper and solid insulation) age due to
thermal stresses, furanic compounds are generated. These compounds which are
dissolved in oil can be detected. Since DP and concentration of furanic
compounds are related the condition of insulation can be indirectly known.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

447

Recovery voltage measurement: In this method the relaxation of insulation after
excitation by a DC source is analyzed. It can be used to measure the moisture
content of the insulation. It is based on the principle that water molecules present
in the insulation get polarized in the direction of the applied field. After
discharging (short circuiting) it, subsequently under the open circuit condition a
finite voltage can be measured (voltage does not reduce to zero) which is a
function of the energy stored in the water molecules.
Detection of winding displacement: Conventionally, reactance measurement is
done to detect mechanical displacements and/or deformations of windings and
structures. The loss of mechanical integrity might occur due to short circuit forces,
winding shrinkage (causing release of clamping pressure) and transportation/
relocation of transformers. Change in reactance of more than 2% for any phase
indicates a winding deformation for transformers up to 100 MVA (particularly
applicable to diagnostics after short circuit test). The corresponding value is 1%
for transformers above 100 MVA as discussed in Chapter 6. There have been also
some efforts to correlate winding looseness with the response of stray losses over
a range of frequencies.
Low voltage impulse (LVI) tests are also popularly used to determine whether
a transformer has passed a short circuit test (based on computed transfer function).
The steepness of the applied voltage is adjusted to obtain a wide frequency band.
It is difficult to obtain repeatable results because of test leads and ambient noise.
The current trend is to use the frequency response analysis (FRA) technique for
assessing the mechanical condition of windings.
Frequency response analysis: This technique is widely used nowadays [27] in
which transfer function of transformer winding is determined by the swept
frequency method (popularly called FRA). The transfer function essentially is a plot
showing the poles (or natural frequencies) as a function of frequency. The transfer
function is compared with the corresponding reference (fingerprint) taken earlier.
The changes in overall shape and resonance frequencies (which occur due to change
of winding inductances and capacitances) are the key indicators of any winding
displacement after the short circuit test, shrinkage or transport. The FRA technique
is more sensitive as compared to the method based on reactance measurement in
detecting winding deformations. This is because, even a small change in winding
geometry can have an appreciable effect on the characteristic frequencies. The
repeatability of FRA results is also better. For the same reason, the FRA technique is
preferred over the LVI method since the main problem with the LVI method is the
difficulty in carrying out comparisons between original signatures and repeated
measurements (since these are affected by ambient noise conditions).
The disadvantage of the FRA technique is the relatively long duration for each
measurement as compared to the LVI method since the measurements are done at
discrete frequencies to determine transfer function for full frequency range. It
should be noted that both FRA and LVI techniques are used to determine the

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

448

Chapter 12

transfer function. In the former, the transfer function is measured by sweeping the
frequency of an input sine wave, in which case, no Fourier transformation is
required. In the latter time-domain method, the transfer function is estimated from
low voltage impulse test data, for which the waveforms (i.e., input impulse voltage
and neutral current response due to it) have to be converted to frequency domain
using Fourier transformation (DFT or FFT).
Wavelet analysis: This technique, which is being applied to fault diagnosis and
protection of transformers in recent years, is advancement over Fourier transform
based methods. It allows study of each frequency component with any desirable
time resolution. The inherent non-stationary nature of transformer neutral current
waveforms (due to impulse excitations) during different fault conditions can be
effectively classified, using its inherent frequency/time-selective feature. The
conventional FRA based techniques cannot identify the time-localization of a
particular frequency component in a time-dependent signal, whereas using
wavelets this is possible, as they are not only localized in frequency but also in
time. This simultaneous or joint time-frequency localization feature of the
wavelet transform is used in [28] for pattern classification of impulse fault
currents. Combined wavelet and neural network approach is used in [29] to
discriminate between an internal fault and a magnetizing inrush current in a power
transformer protection scheme.
On-load tap changers (OLTC): It is well-known that a maximum percentage of
transformer failures are related to OLTC. Hence, the service reliability of OLTC
is of vital importance. The OLTC problems are either of mechanical nature
(faults related to drive mechanism, shaft, springs, etc.) or of electrical nature
(contact wear and tear, burning of transition resistors, dielectric failures, etc.).
Measurement of drive motor torque and current, recording of acoustic signals
during tap changer operation, measurement of contact resistance, measurement
of temperature difference between oil in the main tank and oil in the diverter
switch, etc. are some of the methods that give good indications of these
problems. The measurements are compared with the reference values. The
important aspect in these monitoring systems is to gain a long-term experience
for evaluating such data.
Bushings: On-line monitoring of power factor of bushings can be performed by
vectorially adding currents of three phases obtained from the capacitance (test)
tap. Since in reality the bushings are never identical and system voltages are never
perfectly balanced, the sum current has a non-zero value which is unique for each
set of bushings. Hence, generally the change in the sum current phasor is
monitored. In [30], development of a fiber-optic instrument for on-line
monitoring of dielectric dissipation factor of transformer bushings is reported. It
consists of an electro-optic electric-field sensor (to sense the high voltage),
capacitors (to sense the insulation current) and a signal processing unit.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

449

12.7 Life Assessment and Refurbishment
Transformer life assessment is a process of reviewing the risks of failure for the
given transformer and network conditions. Factors which determine the
remaining life of a transformer can be categorized under three headings [31], viz.
strategic (e.g., load increasing beyond rating), economic (high cost of losses or
maintenance) and technical (aging, overstressing or contamination). A number of
diagnostic tests are used to assess the overall technical condition of a transformer,
which is then related to a criticality in terms of risk of failure or life expectancy.
The remaining (residual) life of the transformer can be estimated by assessing the
extent of deterioration of the paper insulation through its DP test or by knowing
the content of furan compounds in the oil. Furan analysis gives an integrated
overall health of cellulosic insulation whereas DP indicates the extent of
degradation at a specific location [32]. Both these tests can also help in taking
decision about the transformer refurbishment.
During the last one decade, refurbishment of transformers has been given a
serious consideration by many users. It can slow down the insulation ageing and
improve the short circuit strength. During refurbishment, critical components like
on-load tap changer can be upgraded, repaired or replaced enhancing the
transformer reliability. Re-clamping of windings can be done if there is looseness.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Moses, A.J. Electrical steels: past, present and future developments,
Proceedings IEE, Vol. 137, Pt. A, No. 5, September 1990, pp. 233–245.
Harry, W.N., Hasegawa, R., Lee, A.C., and Lowdermilk, L.A. Amorphous alloy
core distribution transformers, Proceedings IEEE, Vol. 79, No. 11, November
1991, pp. 1608–1623.
Girgis, R.S., Baldwin, C.J., Kennedy, W.N., Monaco, S., Lindgren, S.R., Holm,
R.D., and Kothmann, R.E. Design and performance improvements in power
transformers using ribbon cable, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol.
10, No. 2, April 1995, pp. 869–877.
Jaksts, A., Leijon, M., Sasse, C., Frank, H., Andersson, T.H., Forsmark, S.,
Nilsson, L., Fogelberg, T., and Sjogren, A. A major breakthrough in transformer
technology, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–101.
Sykulski, J. K, Beduz, C, Stoll, R.L., Harris, M.R., Goddard, K.F., and Yang, Y.
Prospects for large high temperature superconducting power transformers:
conclusions from a design study, IEE Proceedings—Electric Power
Applications, Vol. 146, No. 1, January 1999, pp. 41–52.
Yamaguchi, H., Sato, Y., and Katoka, T. Comparison between superconducting
and conventional power transformers considering auxiliary facilities, IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, Vol. 5, No. 2, June 1995, pp.
937–940.
Sykulski, J. K, Stoll, R.L., Beduz, C., Power, A.J., Goddard, K.F., and Al-Mosawi

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

450

Chapter 12

M.K. The design, construction and operation of high temperature
superconducting transformers—practical considerations, CIGRE 2000, Paper
No. 12–203.
8. Serres, E., Levillain, C., Camescasse, F.X., Picard, J.F., Lakner, M., Rhyner, J.,
Chen, M., Paul, W., Zueger, H., Backes, J., Bonmann, D., Fleshler, S., Otto, A.,
Diehl, R., Christopherson, C, Mason, R., de Moranville, K., and Daniel, J.
Current limitation in high temperature superconducting transformers and
impact on the grid, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12–205.
9. Lee, J., Kim, W., Hahn, S., Choi, K., Cha, G., and Chang, S. Development of a
three-phase 100 kVA superconducting power transformer with amorphous
cores, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, Vol. 9, No. 2, July
1999, pp. 1293–1296.
10. Reis, C.T., Mehta, S.P., McConnell, B.W., and Jones, R.H. Development of
high temperature superconducting power transformers, IEEE Power
Engineering Society Winter Meeting, Vol. 2, 2001, pp. 432–437.
11. Togawa, Y., Ikeda, M., Toda, K., and Esumi, K. Progress of gas-insulated
transformers, IEEE International Conference on Energy Management and
Power Delivery, Singapore, Vol. 2, November 1995, pp. 540–547.
12. Takizawa, A., Ono, Y., Inaka, S., Konno, K., Nozaki, Y., Suzuki, T., Yamazaki,
S., Saito, S., and Shirone, T. Development of large capacity low-noise gasinsulated transformer, IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, Vol.
2, 1999, pp. 1036–1041.
13. Muramoto, H., Yamazaki, T., Oshi, T., Uehara, K., Toda, K., Ikeda, M., and
Yanabu, S. Development and application of the 275 kV 300 MVA separate
cooling, sheet winding gas insulated transformer, IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Vol. 7, No. 2, April 1992, pp. 888–894.
14. Takahashi, E., Tanaka, K., Toda, K., Ikeda, M, Teranishi, T., Inaba, M., and
Yanari, T. Development of large-capacity gas-insulated transformer, IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 11, No. 2, April 1996, pp. 895–902.
15. Chan, L. and Sum, C.L. Operating experience of SF6 gas-filled power
transformers, IEE International Conference on advances in power system
control, operation and management, November 1991, Hon Kong, pp. 410–
414.
16. Olivares, J.C., Liu, Y., Canedo, J.M., Escarela-Perez, R., Driesen, J., and Moreno,
P. Reducing losses in distribution transformers, IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Vol. 18, No. 3, July 2003, pp. 821–826.
17. Cornick, K., Filliat, B., Kieny, and Muller, W. Distribution of very fast transient
overvoltages in transformer windings, CIGRE 1992, Paper No. 12–204.
18. Ringlee, R.J. and Stewart, J.R. Geomagnetic effects on power systems, IEEE
Power Engineering Review, July 1989, pp. 6–9.
19. Albertson, V.D., Bozoki, B., Feero, W.E., Kappenman, J.G., Larsen E. V., Nordell,
D.E., Ponder, J., Prabhakara, F.S., Thompson, K., and Walling, R. Geomagnetic
disturbance effects on power systems, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
Vol. 8, No. 3, July 1993, pp. 1206–1216.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Recent Trends in Transformer Technology

451

20. Kappenman, J.G. Geomagnetic storms and their impact on power systems,
IEEE Power Engineering Review, May 1996, pp. 5–8.
21. Wrubel, J.N. Monitoring program protects transformers from geomagnetic
effects, IEEE Computer Applications in Power, January 1992, pp. 11–14.
22. Hameyer, K., Driesen, J., Gersem, H.D., and Belmans, R. The classification of
coupled field problems, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 35, No. 3, May
1999, pp. 1618–1621.
23. Driesen, J., Deliege, G., Belmans, R., and Hameyer, K. Coupled thermomagnetic simulation of the foil-winding transformer connected to a nonlinear load, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2000, pp.
1381–1385.
24. Renyuan, T., Shenghui, W., Yan, L., Xiulian, W., and Xiang, C. Transient
simulation of power transformers using 3D finite element model coupled to
electric circuit equations, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 36, No. 4,
July 2000, pp. 1417–1420.
25. Rausch, M., Kaltenbacher, M., Landes, H., Lerch, R., Anger, J., Gerth, J., and
Boss, P. Combination of finite and boundary element methods in investigation
and prediction of load-controlled noise of power transformers, Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 250 (2), 2002, pp. 323–338.
26. Bengtsson, C. Status and trends in transformer monitoring, IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, Vol. 11, No. 3, July 1996, pp. 1379–1384.
27. Feser, K., Christian, J., Neumann, C, Sundermann, U., Leibfried, T., Kachler, A.,
and Loppacher, M. The transfer function method for detection of winding
displacements on power transformers after transport, short circuit or 30 years
of service, CIGRE 2000, Paper No. 12/33–04.
28. Purkait, P. and Chakravorti, S. Pattern classification of impulse faults in
transformers by wavelet analysis, IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation, Vol. 9, No. 4, August 2002, pp. 555–561.
29. Mao, P.L. and Aggarwal, R.K. A novel approach to the classification of the
transient phenomenon in power transformers using combined wavelet
transform and neural network, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 16,
No. 4, October 2001, pp. 654–660.
30. Jaeger, N.A. F., Polovick, G.S., Kato, H., and Cherukupalli, S.E. On-line
dissipation factor monitoring of high-voltage current transformers and
bushings, CIGRE 1998, Paper No. 12–102.
31. Breen, G. Essential requirements to maintain transformers in service, CIGRE
1992, Paper No. 12–103.
32. Shrinet, V., Patel, M.J., and Ramamoorthy, M. Role of furan and DP analysis
for refurbishment of power transformer: few case studies, CIGRE 2000, Paper
No. 12/33–09.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix A: Fault Calculations

In this appendix, asymmetrical fault calculations for a transformer are given. A
single-line-to-ground fault on LV side is considered. The neutrals of LV and HV
windings are solidly grounded. Two distinct cases are considered, viz. with and
without fault in-feed from the secondary (LV) side. For each of these two cases, two
conditions are considered, viz. with and without stabilizing tertiary winding (TV).
The effects of omitting tertiary winding are illustrated with these cases.
Transformer Data:
Rating (S)=25 MVA, Core construction: three-phase three-limb
Voltage ratio: HV/LV/TV, 132/11/11 KV, star/star/delta
Leakage sequence impedances (based on 25 MVA base):
HV/LV:Z1=Z2=12%, Z0= 10.2%
HV/TV:Z1=Z2=20%, Z0=17.0%
LV/TV:Z1=Z2=6%, Z0=5.4%
132 KV system fault level (SF)=5000 MVA
The positive-sequence system impedance on the HV side is Z1HS=0.5% (calculated
by equation 6.2). The HV and LV side systems are assumed as effectively
grounded systems (X0/X1 not greater than 3). Here, in particular, the zero-sequence
system impedances on the LV and HV sides are assumed to be equal to the
corresponding positive-sequence system impedances for simplicity. As
mentioned earlier, two alternatives are considered for 11 KV (LV) system:
(i) Without any fault in-feed from 11 KV system.
(ii) With fault in-feed from 11 KV system:
453
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

454

Appendix A
11 KV system fault level (SF)=833.33 MVA, which gives the positivesequence system impedance on LV side: Z1LS=3.0% (by equation 6.2).

The equivalent impedances in the star equivalent circuit can be computed by
using the theory given in Section 3.5 (Chapter 3) as
ZH=(ZHL+ZHT-ZLT)/2
ZL=(ZHL+ZLT-ZHT)/2
ZT=(ZHT+ZLT-ZHL)/2
Therefore, the corresponding positive-, negative- and zero-sequence impedances
of HV, LV and TV windings are computed as follows:
Z1H=Z2H=(12+20-6)/2=l3%, Z0H=(10.2+17-5.4)/2=10.9%
Z1L=Z2L=(12+6-20)/2=-l%, Z0L=(10.2+5.4-17)/2 =-0.7%
Z1T=Z2T=(20+6-12)/2=7%, Z0T=(17+5.4-10.2)/2= 6.1%

Figure A1 Sequence network for Case A1.1

A1 Asymmetrical Fault with No In-Feed from LV Side
A1.1 Delta connected tertiary winding is present
The equivalent network under the fault condition is shown in figure A1 for a
single-line-to-ground fault on the LV side. All the impedances are in % values.
The network can be derived from figure 6.3 (a) with impedances Z1LS, Z2LS and Z0LS
taken to be effectively infinite since there is no in-feed from the LV side.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix A

455

Total impedance=2(0.5+13–1)-0.7+(11.4//6.1)=28.27%
For a single phase-earth fault, using equations 6.6 and 6.7 we get the values of
sequence components of currents as
I1=I2=I0=100/28.27=3.54 p.u. (i.e., 3.54 times the rated current).
Total fault current=I1+I2+I0=3(3.54)=10.62 p.u.
The fault current in any of the windings is calculated by adding the corresponding
sequence currents flowing in them in the three sequence networks. The neutral of
LV and HV windings carries 3 times the corresponding zero-sequence current
flowing in them. Therefore,
Current through HV winding=3.54+3.54+3.54 (6.1/17.5)=8.31 p.u.
Current through LV winding=3.54+3.54+3.54=10.62 p.u.
Current through stabilizing winding=3.54 (11.4/17.5)=2.31 p.u.
Current through HV neutral=3×3.54 (6.1/17.5)=3.7 p.u.
Current through LV neutral=total fault current=3×3.54 =10.62 p.u.
A1.2 Delta connected tertiary winding is absent
The equivalent network under the fault condition is shown in figure A2 for a
single-line-to-ground fault on the LV side. Proceeding in the similar way as in
Section A1.1 we get
Total Impedance=2(0.5+13–1)-0.7+0.5+10.9=35.7%

Figure A2 Sequence network for Case A1.2

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

456

Appendix A
I1=I2=I0=100/35.7=2.8 p.u.
Total fault current=I1+I2+I0=3 (2.8)=8.4 p.u.
Current through HV winding=2.8+2.8+2.8=8.4 p.u.
Current through LV winding=2.8+2.8+2.8=8.4 p.u.
Current through HV neutral=8.4 p.u.
Current through LV neutral=8.4 p.u.

It is to be noted that the single-line-to-ground fault current in this case (8.4 p.u.) is
more than the three-phase fault current (i.e., 1/Z =1/0.12=8.33 p.u.) due to two
1
reasons. First, the zero-sequence leakage impedance of the transformer is less than
the positive-sequence leakage impedance. Second, it is assumed that the positiveand zero-sequence system impedances of HV side are equal (0.5 p.u.). In many of
the cases, the system zero-sequence impedance is more than the positivesequence impedance, which will make the single-line-to-ground fault current
lower than the three-phase fault current.
It can be observed from the above two case studies that the absence of the
tertiary stabilizing winding reduces the total fault current and the current in the
faulted winding (LV). However, the current in HV neutral increases significantly.

Figure A3 Sequence network for Case A2.1

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix A

457

A2 Asymmetrical Fault with In-Feed from LV Side
A2.1 Delta connected tertiary winding is present
The equivalent network under the fault condition is shown in figure A3 for a
single-line-to-ground fault on the LV side. The network is same as that given in
figure 6.3.
Total positive-sequence impedance=12.5//3=2.42%
Total negative-sequence impedance=12.5//3=2.42%
Total zero-sequence impedance=[(11.4//6.1)-0.7]//3=1.56%
Total impedance=2.42+2.42+1.56=6.4%
I1=I2=I0=100/6.4=15.62 p.u.
Total fault current=I1+I2+I0=3 (15.62)=46.86 p.u.
Current through HV winding
=15.62(3/15.5)+15.62(3/15.5)+15.62(3/6.27)(6.1/17.5)
=3.02+3.02+2.6=8.64 p.u.
Current through LV winding=3.02+3.02+15.62(3/6.27)=13.51 p.u.
Current through stabilizing winding=15.62(3/6.27)(11.4/17.5)=4.87 p.u.
Current through HV neutral=3×2.6=7.8 p.u.
Current through LV neutral=3×7.47=22.41 p.u.

Figure A4 Sequence network for Case A2.2

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

458

Appendix A

A2.2 Delta connected tertiary winding is absent
The equivalent network under the fault condition is shown in figure A4 for a
single-line-to-ground fault on the LV side. Proceeding in the similar way as in
Section A2.1 we get
Total positive-sequence impedance=12.5//3=2.42%
Total negative-sequence impedance=12.5//3=2.42%
Total zero-sequence impedance=10.7//3=2.34%
Total Impedance=2.42+2.42+2.34–7.18%
I1=I2=I0=100/7.18 7.18=13.93 p.u.
Total fault current=I1+I2+I0=3(13.93)=41.79 p.u.
Current through HV winding
=13.93(3/15.5)+13.93(3/15.5)+13.93(3/13.7)
=2.7+2.7+3.05=8.45 p.u.
Current through LV winding=2.7+2.7+3.05=8.45 p.u.
Current through HV neutral=3×3.05=9.15 p.u.
Current through LV neutral=3×3.05=9.15 p.u.
It can be observed from the above two case studies (in-feed from LV side) that the
absence of the tertiary stabilizing winding reduces the total fault current and the
current in the faulted winding (LV). The current in HV neutral increases.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix B: Stress and Capacitance
Formulae

In this appendix, formulae are derived for electric stress and capacitance for
commonly existing electrode configurations in transformers such as two round
electrodes or round electrode and plane.

B1 Stress Calculations
The information about the electric field intensity and potential field between two
parallel cylindrical electrodes can be found by considering the respective
equivalent line charges. Consider two line charges +ρL and -ρL (charges per unit
length) placed at x=+m and x=-m respectively as shown in figure B1. Now, due to
single line charge ρL, the electric field intensity at a distance r is given by
(B1)
where e is permittivity of medium. The potential reckoned from a distance R is

(B2)
The resultant potential at point A (figure B1) due to line charges +ρL and-ρL is
(B3)

459
Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

460

Appendix B

Figure B1 Two line charges placed at x=-m and x=+m

Let us now find the nature of equipotential surface having potential of u. From
equation B3 we get

But from figure B1 we have

Solving by componendo and dividendo,

By algebraic manipulations we get

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix B

461

(B4)

This is the equation of a circle with radius
and center
Thus, the equipotential surface is a cylinder which intersects the x-y plane in a
circle with radius r and center at (s, 0).
From the above expressions for radius and center we get
(B5)

(B6)
By substituting the value of m in the equation for radius we have
(B7)
Now, from equations B5 and B7 we get

Thus, we get the expression for potential as
(B8)
Now, we will consider two parallel cylindrical conductors of radii R1 and R2,
placed such that the distance between their centers is 2s. The electric field
intensity and potential between the two conductors are calculated by considering
the corresponding two equivalent line charges as shown in figure B2.

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

462

Appendix B

Figure B2 Configuration of two parallel cylindrical conductors

Now,
S1+S2=2s

(B9)

Using equation B6 we can write

(B10)

By solving equations B9 and B10 we get

The electric field intensity at point P on the surface of the conductor on the right
side is given by

Now, by putting the value of

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

in the above equation we get

Appendix B

463

By putting the value of s1 obtained earlier in the above equation we get

(B11)
Now, by using equation B8 for potential, the potential difference between points
P and Q is given as

By putting the values of s1 and s2 in the above equation and simplifying,

Putting this value in equation for Ep (equation B11) we have
(B12)
where

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

464

Appendix B

is called as non-uniformity factor.
Now, if both the electrodes have the same radius, i.e., R1=R2=R, then

(B13)

where
Now, we will consider the other most commonly encountered geometry, i.e.,
cylindrical conductor—plane geometry as shown in figure B3. The ground plane
at point G and the round conductor can be replaced by the configuration of the
conductor and its image as shown in the figure. From equations B12 and B13 the
electric field intensity, in this case, at point P is given as
(B14)
and non-uniformity factor is

(B15)

Figure B3 Cylindrical conductor—plane geometry

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix B

465

Now, the electric field intensity at point G is

(B16)

Using equation B8, the potential at the conductor surface is given as

(B17)
Putting this value in equation for EG we get

(B18)

(B19)

The non-uniformity factor fx for any point x between the center of the conductor
and ground in the x direction (figure B4) can now be found as below.
The electric field intensity at a point with distance of x from the conductor
center is
(B20)

Now, from equation B8 we have

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

466

Appendix B

Figure B4 Stress and voltage at any point x from conductor center

(B21)
Putting this value in the equation for electric field we get

(B22)

(B23)

The voltage at point x can be calculated using equation B3 as

(B24)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Appendix B

467

(B25)

B2 Capacitance Calculations
B2.1 Capacitance between two parallel cylindrical conductors
From figure B2 for the conditions that R1=R2=R and s1=s2=s, and by using equation
B8, the capacitance between two parallel cylindrical conductors per unit length is
given by

(B26)

Using equations B5 and B8 and simplifying we get the relation:

(B27)
From the equations B26 and B27, we finally get the capacitance per unit length as

(B28)

B2.2 Capacitance of cylindrical conductor and plane at ground potential
From figure B4 and by using the equation B8, the capacitance per unit length
between a conductor and ground plane is given by

(B29)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

468

Appendix B

By using equation B27, we get the capacitance per unit length between the
conductor and ground as

(B30)

Copyright © 2004 by Marcel Dekker, Inc.

